ThePoint-to-Point Tunneling Protocol(PPTP) is an obsolete method for implementingvirtual private networks. PPTP has many well known security issues.
PPTP uses aTCPcontrol channel and aGeneric Routing Encapsulationtunnel to encapsulatePPPpackets. Many modern VPNs use various forms ofUDPfor this same functionality.
The PPTP specification does not describeencryptionorauthenticationfeatures and relies on the Point-to-Point Protocol being tunneled to implement any and all security functionalities.
The PPTP implementation that ships with theMicrosoft Windowsproduct families implements various levels of authentication and encryption natively as standard features of the Windows PPTP stack. The intended use of this protocol is to provide security levels and remote access levels comparable with typicalVPNproducts.
A specification for PPTP was published in July 1999 as RFC 2637and was developed by a vendor consortium formed byMicrosoft,Ascend Communications(today part ofNokia),3Com, and others.
PPTP has not been proposed nor ratified as a standard by theInternet Engineering Task Force.
A PPTP tunnel is instantiated by communication to the peer onTCPport 1723. This TCP connection is then used to initiate and manage aGREtunnel to the same peer. The PPTP GRE packet format is non standard, including a newacknowledgement numberfield replacing the typicalroutingfield in the GRE header. However, as in a normal GRE connection, those modified GRE packets are directly encapsulated into IP packets, and seen as IP protocol number 47. The GRE tunnel is used to carry encapsulated PPP packets, allowing the tunnelling of any protocols that can be carried within PPP, includingIP,NetBEUIandIPX.
In the Microsoft implementation, the tunneled PPP traffic can be authenticated withPAP,CHAP,MS-CHAP v1/v2.
PPTP has been the subject of many security analyses and serious security vulnerabilities have been found in the protocol. The known vulnerabilities relate to the underlying PPP authentication protocols used, the design of theMPPEprotocol as well as the integration between MPPE and PPP authentication for session key establishment.
A summary of these vulnerabilities is below:
EAP-TLSis seen as the superior authentication choice for PPTP;however, it requires implementation of apublic-key infrastructurefor both client and server certificates. As such, it may not be a viable authentication option for some remote access installations. Most networks that use PPTP have to apply additional security measures or be deemed completely inappropriate for the modern internet environment. At the same time, doing so means negating the aforementioned benefits of the protocol to some point.