Intelephony, amain distribution frame(MDFormain frame) is a signaldistribution framefor connecting equipment (inside plant) to cables andsubscriber carrierequipment (outside plant).
The MDF is a termination point within the localtelephone exchangewhere exchange equipment and terminations oflocal loopsare connected by jumper wires at the MDF.  All cable copper pairs supplying services throughusertelephone linesare terminated at the MDF and distributed through the MDF to equipment within the local exchange e.g.repeatersandDSLAM.  Cables tointermediate distribution frames(IDF) terminate at the MDF.Trunkcables may terminate on the same MDF or on a separate trunk main distribution frame (TMDF).
Like otherdistribution framesthe MDF provides flexibility in assigning facilities, at lower cost and higher capacity than apatch panel.
The most common kind of large MDF is a long steel rack accessible from both sides. On one side,terminationblocks are arranged horizontally at the front of rack shelves.  Jumpers lie on the shelves and go through an insulated steel hoop to run vertically to other termination blocks that are arranged vertically.  There is a hoop or ring at the intersection of each level and each vertical.  Installing a jumper historically required two workers, one on either side of the MDF. The shelves are shallow enough to allow the rings to be within arm's reach, but the workers prefer to hang the jumper on a hook on a pole so their partner can pull it through the ring.  A fanning strip at the back of each termination block prevents the wires from covering each other's terminals.  With disciplined administration, the MDF can hold over a hundred thousand jumpers, with dozens changed every day, for decades without tangling.
The MDF usually holdstelephone exchangeprotective devices includingheat coils, and functions as atest pointbetween a line and the exchange equipment.
Before 1960, MDF jumpers were generallysoldered.  This was reliable but slow and expensive.Wire wrapwas introduced in the 1960s, andpunch blocksin the 1970s. In most exchanges in the UK, soldered blocks are still in use, but are being slowly phased out.
Each jumper is atwisted pair.  Middle 20th century jumper wires in the USA were 24AWGsingle strand copper, with a softpolyethyleneinner jacket and a cotton wrapper, impregnated to make it slightly brittle and easy to remove neatly.  Late 20th century ones had a single, thicker coating ofpolyethylene cross-linkedto provide a suitable degree of brittleness.
Some urban telephone exchange MDFs are two stories high so they do not have to be more than a city block long.  A few are three stories. Access to the upper levels can be either by a traveling ladder attached to the MDF, or by mezzanine walkways at a suitable height. By British custom the cables to the outside world are terminated on the horizontal side, and the indoors equipment on the vertical side. American usage is the opposite.
Smaller MDFs, and some modern large ones, are single sided so one worker can install, remove or change a jumper.COSMOSand other computerizedOperations Support Systemshelp by assigning terminals close to one another, so most jumpers need not be long and shelves on either type of MDF do not become congested.  This database keeps track of all terminals and jumpers.  In the early and middle 20th century these records were kept as pencil entries in ledger books.  The later database method saves much labor by permitting old jumpers to be reused for new lines.
The adoption ofdistributed switchingin the late 20th century diminished the need for large, active, central MDFs.
Sometimes the MDF is combined with other kinds ofdistribution framein aCDF.
The MDF in aprivate branch exchangeperforms functions similar to those performed by the MDF in a central office.
Automated Main Distribution Frame(AMDF) has been a subject of experiments.