Small Form-factor Pluggable(SFP) is a compact,hot-pluggablenetwork interface module format used for bothtelecommunicationanddata communicationsapplications. An SFP interface onnetworking hardwareis a modular slot for a media-specifictransceiver, such as for afiber-optic cableor a copper cable.The advantage of using SFPs compared to fixed interfaces (e.g.modular connectorsinEthernet switches) is that individual ports can be equipped with different types of transceivers as required, with the majority includingoptical line terminals,network cards,switchesandrouters.
Theform factorand electrical interface are specified by amulti-source agreement(MSA) under the auspices of theSmall Form Factor Committee.The SFP replaced the largergigabit interface converter(GBIC) in most applications, and has been referred to as aMini-GBICby some vendors.
SFP transceivers exist supportingsynchronous optical networking(SONET),Gigabit Ethernet,Fibre Channel,PON, and other communications standards. At introduction, typical speeds were1 Gbit/sfor Ethernet SFPs and up to4 Gbit/sfor Fibre Channel SFP modules.In 2006,SFP+specification brought speeds up to10 Gbit/sand the laterSFP28iteration, introduced in 2014,is designed for speeds of25 Gbit/s.
A slightly larger sibling is the four-laneQuad Small Form-factor Pluggable(QSFP). The additional lanes allow for speeds 4 times their corresponding SFP. In 2014, theQSFP28variant was published allowing speeds up to100 Gbit/s.In 2019, the closely relatedQSFP56was standardizeddoubling the top speeds to200 Gbit/swith products already selling from major vendors.There are inexpensive adapters allowing SFP transceivers to be placed in a QSFP port.
Both aSFP-DD,which allows for100 Gbit/sover two lanes, as well as aQSFP-DDspecifications, which allows for400 Gbit/sover eight lanes, have been published.These use aform factorwhich is directlybackward compatibleto their respective predecessors.
An even larger sibling, theOctal Small Format Pluggable(OSFP), had products released in 2022capable of800 Gbit/slinks between network equipment. It is a slightly larger version than the QSFP form factor allowing for larger power outputs. The OSFP standard was initially announced in 2016with the 4.0 version released in 2021 allowing for800 Gbit/svia 8×100 Gbit/selectrical data lanes.Its proponents say a low-cost adapter will allow for backwards compatibility with QSFP modules.
SFP transceivers are available with a variety of transmitter and receiver specifications, allowing users to select the appropriate transceiver for each link to provide the requiredopticalorelectrical reachover the available media type (e.g.twisted pairortwinaxialcopper cables,multi-modeorsingle-modefiber cables). Transceivers are also designated by their transmission speed. SFP modules are commonly available in several different categories.
Note that the QSFP/QSFP+/QSFP28/QSFP56 are designed to be electrically backward compatible with SFP/SFP+/SFP28 or SFP56 respectively. Using a simple adapter or a special direct attached cable it is possible to connect those interfaces together using just one lane instead of four provided by the QSFP/QSFP+/QSFP28/QSFP56 form factor. The same applies to the QSFP-DD form factor with 8 lanes which can work downgraded to 4/2/1 lanes.
TheSFP+(enhanced small form-factor pluggable) is an enhanced version of the SFP that supports data rates up to 16Gbit/s. The SFP+ specification was first published on May 9, 2006, and version 4.1 was published on July 6, 2009.SFP+ supports8 Gbit/sFibre Channel,10 Gigabit EthernetandOptical Transport Networkstandard OTU2. It is a popular industry format supported by many network component vendors. Although the SFP+ standard does not include mention of16 Gbit/sFibre Channel, it can be used at this speed.Besides the data rate, the major difference between 8 and16 Gbit/sFibre Channel is the encoding method. The64b/66b encodingused for16 Gbit/sis a more efficient encoding mechanism than8b/10bused for8 Gbit/s, and allows for the data rate to double without doubling the line rate. 16GFC doesn't really use16 Gbit/ssignaling anywhere. It uses a 14.025 Gbit/sline rate to achieve twice the throughput of 8GFC.
SFP+ also introducesdirect attachfor connecting two SFP+ ports without dedicated transceivers. Direct attach cables (DAC) exist in passive (up to 7 m), active (up to 15 m), and active optical (AOC, up to 100 m) variants.
10 Gbit/sSFP+ modules are exactly the same dimensions as regular SFPs, allowing the equipment manufacturer to re-use existing physical designs for 24 and 48-port switches and modularline cards. In comparison to earlierXENPAKorXFPmodules, SFP+ modules leave more circuitry to be implemented on the host board instead of inside the module.Through the use of an active electronic adapter, SFP+ modules may be used in older equipment withXENPAKportsandX2ports.
SFP+ modules can be described aslimitingorlineartypes; this describes the functionality of the inbuilt electronics. Limiting SFP+ modules include a signal amplifier to re-shape the (degraded) received signal whereas linear ones do not. Linear modules are mainly used with the low bandwidth standards such as10GBASE-LRM; otherwise, limiting modules are preferred.
SFP28 is a25 Gbit/sinterface which evolved from the100 Gigabit Ethernetinterface which is typically implemented with 4 by25 Gbit/sdata lanes. Identical in mechanical dimensions to SFP and SFP+, SFP28 implements one28 Gbit/slaneaccommodating25 Gbit/sof data with encoding overhead.
SFP28 modules exist supporting single-or multi-modefiber connections, active optical cableand direct attach copper.
Thecompact small form-factor pluggable(cSFP) is a version of SFP with the same mechanical form factor allowing two independent bidirectional channels per port. It is used primarily to increase port density and decrease fiber usage per port.
Thesmall form-factor pluggable double density(SFP-DD) multi-source agreement is a standard published in 2019 for doubling port density. According to the SFD-DD MSA website: "Network equipment based on the SFP-DD will support legacy SFP modules and cables, and new double density products."SFP-DD uses two lanes to transmit.
Currently, the following speeds are defined:
Quad Small Form-factor Pluggable(QSFP) transceivers are available with a variety of transmitter and receiver types, allowing users to select the appropriate transceiver for each link to provide the requiredoptical reachovermulti-modeorsingle-mode fiber.
Switch and router manufacturers implementing QSFP+ ports in their products frequently allow for the use of a single QSFP+ port as four independent10 Gigabit Ethernetconnections, greatly increasing port density. For example, a typical 24-port QSFP+1Uswitch would be able to service 96x10GbE connections.There also exist fanout cables to adapt a single QSFP28 port to four independent25 Gigabit EthernetSFP28 ports (QSFP28-to-4×SFP28)as well as cables to adapt a single QSFP56 port to four independent50 Gigabit EthernetSFP56 ports (QSFP56-to-4×SFP56).
SFP sockets are found inEthernet switches, routers, firewalls andnetwork interface cards. They are used in Fibre Channelhost adaptersand storage equipment. Because of their low cost, low profile, and ability to provide a connection to different types of optical fiber, SFP provides such equipment with enhanced flexibility.
SFP sockets and transceivers are also used for long-distanceserial digital interface(SDI) transmission.
The SFP transceiver is not standardized by any official standards body, but rather is specified by amulti-source agreement(MSA) among competing manufacturers. The SFP was designed after theGBICinterface, and allows greaterport density(number of transceivers per given area) than the GBIC, which is why SFP is also known as mini-GBIC.
However, as a practical matter, some networking equipment manufacturers engage invendor lock-inpractices whereby they deliberately break compatibility withgenericSFPs by adding a check in the device'sfirmwarethat will enable only the vendor's own modules.Third-party SFP manufacturers have introduced SFPs with EEPROMs which may be programmed to match any vendor ID.
SFP transceivers areright-handed: From their perspective, they transmit on the right and receive on the left. When looking into the optical connectors, transmission comes from the left and reception is on the right.
The SFP transceiver contains aprinted circuit boardwith anedge connectorwith 20 pads that mate on the rear with the SFP electrical connector in the host system. The QSFP has 38 pads including 4 high-speed transmit data pairs and 4 high-speed receive data pairs.
The physical dimensions of the SFP transceiver (and its subsequent faster variants) are narrower than the later QSFP counterparts, which allows for SFP transceivers to be placed in QSFP ports via an inexpensive adapter. Both are smaller than theXFP transceiver.
The SFP MSA defines a 256-byte memory map into an EEPROM describing the transceiver's capabilities, standard interfaces, manufacturer, and other information, which is accessible over a serialI²Cinterface at the 8-bit address 0b1010000X (0xA0).
Modern optical SFP transceivers support standard digital diagnostics monitoring (DDM) functions.This feature is also known as digital optical monitoring (DOM). This capability allows monitoring of the SFP operating parameters in real time. Parameters include optical output power, optical input power, temperature, laser bias current, and transceiver supply voltage. In network equipment, this information is typically made available viaSimple Network Management Protocol(SNMP). A DDM interface allows end users to display diagnostics data and alarms for optical fiber transceivers and can be used to diagnose why a transceiver is not working.