Digital asset management(DAM) and the implementation of its use as a computer application is required in the collection ofdigital assetsto ensure that the owner, and possibly their delegates, can perform operations on the data files.
The termmedia asset management(MAM) may be used in reference to Digital Asset Management when applied to the sub-set of digital objects commonly considered "media", namely audio recordings, photos, and videos.Any editing process that involves media, especially video, can make use of a MAM to access media components to be edited together or combined with a live feed in a fluent manner. A MAM typically offers at least one searchable index of the images, audio, and videos it contains, constructed from metadata harvested from the images using pattern recognition, or input manually.
Digital asset management (DAM) may focus on the electronic management of any form of a digitally stored piece of information. DAM is certainly strategic, while MAM is almost always tactical. Both asset management primarily reflect long-term stored content that is used for archiving, preservation, and most notably reuse.
Applications implement Digital Asset Management (DAM) by importing it from theanalogand/ordigitaldomains (byencoding,scanning,optical character recognition, etc.) or by authoring it as a new object.
A primary function of a DAM system is to make assets easily available to its users by providing a searchable index that supportsretrievalof assets by their content and/ormetadata.Thecatalogingfunction is usually part of the ingestion process for new assets.
Digital assets will typically have alifecycle, which may include various states such as creation, approval, live, archived, and deleted.
Often a DAM system will store earlier versions of a digital asset and allow those to be downloaded or reverted to. Therefore, a DAM system can operate as an advanced type ofversion controlsystem.
Finally, a DAM system typically includes security controls ensuring relevant people have access to assets. This will often involve integration with existing directory services via a technology such assingle sign-on.
Smaller DAM systems are used in a particular operational context, for instance, in video production systems. The key differentiators between them are the types of input encoders used for creating digital copies of assets to bring them under management, and the output decoders and/or formatters used to make them usable as documents and/or online resources. Themetadataof a content item can serve as a guide to the selection of thecodec(s) needed to handle the content during processing and may be of use when applyingaccess controlrules to enforce authorization policy.
Assets that require specific technologies to be used in a workflow need to have their bandwidth, latency, and access control requirements considered in the design of the tools that create or store them, as well as in the architecture of the system that distributes and archives them.When assets are not actively being worked on, they can be stored in a DAM in various formats, including as a blob (binary large objectin adatabase) or as a file in a standard file system, which is "cheaper" to store than the form needed during operations on them.This allows the implementation of large-scale DAM as an assembly of high-performance processing systems within a network with a high-density storage solution at its center.
Digital asset management systems fall into the following classifications:
All of these types will include features for workflow management, collaboration, project management, andrevision control.
An asset can exist in several formats and in a sequence of versions. The digital version of the original asset is generally captured in as high resolution, colour depth, and (if applicable) frame rate as needed to ensure that results are of acceptable quality for the end-use. There can also bethumbnailcopies of lower quality for use in visual indexing.
Metadatafor an asset can include its packaging, encoding, provenance, ownership and access rights, and location of original creation. It is used to provide hints to the tools and systems used to work on, or with, the asset about how it should be handled and displayed.