Avirtual local area network(VLAN) is anybroadcast domainthat ispartitionedand isolated in acomputer networkat thedata link layer(OSI layer 2).In this context,virtualrefers to a physical object recreated and altered by additional logic, within thelocal area network. Basically, a VLAN behaves like a virtual switch or network link that can share the same physical structure with other VLANs while staying logically separate from them. VLANs work by applying tags to network frames and handling these tags in networking systems, in effect creating the appearance and functionality ofnetwork trafficthat, while on a single physical network, behaves as if it were split between separate networks. In this way, VLANs can keep network applications separate despite being connected to the same physical network, and without requiring multiple sets of cabling and networking devices to be deployed.
VLANs allownetwork administratorsto group hosts together even if the hosts are not directly connected to the samenetwork switch. Because VLAN membership can be configured through software, this can greatly simplifynetwork designand deployment. Without VLANs, grouping hosts according to their resource needs the labor of relocatingnodesor rewiringdata links. VLANs allow devices that must be kept separate to share the cabling of a physical network and yet be prevented from directly interacting with one another. This managed sharing yields gains in simplicity,security,traffic management, and economy. For example, a VLAN can be used to separate traffic within a business based on individual users or groups of users or their roles (e.g. network administrators), or based on traffic characteristics (e.g. low-priority traffic prevented from impinging on the rest of the network's functioning). ManyInternet hosting servicesuse VLANs to separate customers' private zones from one other, allowing each customer's servers to be grouped in a single network segment no matter where the individual servers are located in thedata center. Some precautions are needed to prevent traffic "escaping" from a given VLAN, an exploit known asVLAN hopping.
To subdivide a network into VLANs, one configuresnetwork equipment. Simpler equipment might partition only each physical port (if even that), in which case each VLAN runs over a dedicatednetwork cable. More sophisticated devices can markframesthroughVLAN tagging, so that a single interconnect (trunk) may be used to transport data for multiple VLANs. Since VLANs share bandwidth, a VLAN trunk can uselink aggregation,quality-of-serviceprioritization, or both to route data efficiently.
VLANs address issues such asscalability, security, and network management. Network architects set up VLANs to providenetwork segmentation. Routers between VLANs filterbroadcast traffic, enhancenetwork security, performaddress summarization, and mitigatenetwork congestion.
In a network utilizing broadcasts forservice discovery, addressassignmentandresolutionand other services, as the number of peers on a network grows, the frequency of broadcasts also increases. VLANs can help manage broadcast traffic by forming multiplebroadcast domains. Breaking up a large network into smaller independent segments reduces the amount of broadcast traffic each network device and network segment has to bear. Switches may not bridge network traffic between VLANs, as doing so would violate the integrity of the VLAN broadcast domain.
VLANs can also help create multiplelayer 3networks on a single physical infrastructure. VLANs aredata link layer(OSI layer 2) constructs, analogous toInternet Protocol(IP)subnets, which arenetwork layer(OSI layer 3) constructs. In an environment employing VLANs, a one-to-one relationship often exists between VLANs and IP subnets, although it is possible to have multiple subnets on one VLAN.
Without VLAN capability, users are assigned to networks based on geography and are limited by physical topologies and distances. VLANs can logically group networks to decouple the users' network location from their physical location. By using VLANs, one can control traffic patterns and react quickly to employee or equipment relocations. VLANs provide the flexibility to adapt to changes in network requirements and allow for simplified administration.
VLANs can be used to partition a local network into several distinctive segments, for instance:
A common infrastructure shared across VLAN trunks can provide a measure of security with great flexibility for a comparatively low cost. Quality of service schemes can optimize traffic on trunk links for real-time (e.g.VoIP) or low-latency requirements (e.g.SAN). However, VLANs as a security solution should be implemented with great care as they can be defeated unless implemented carefully.
Incloud computingVLANs, IP addresses, andMAC addressesin the cloud are resources that end users can manage.  To help mitigate security issues, placing cloud-based virtual machines on VLANs may be preferable to placing them directly on the Internet.
Network technologies with VLAN capabilities include:
After successful experiments with voice over Ethernet from 1981 to 1984,W. David SincoskiejoinedBellcoreand began addressing the problem of scaling up Ethernet networks.  At 10 Mbit/s, Ethernet was faster than most alternatives at the time. However, Ethernet was a broadcast network and there was no good way of connecting multiple Ethernet networks together.  This limited the total bandwidth of an Ethernet network to 10 Mbit/s and the maximum distance between nodes to a few hundred feet.
By contrast, although the existing telephone network's speed for individual connections was limited to 56 kbit/s (less than one hundredth of Ethernet's speed), the total bandwidth of that network was estimated at 1 Tbit/s(100,000 times greater than Ethernet).
Although it was possible to useIP routingto connect multiple Ethernet networks together, it was expensive and relatively slow.  Sincoskie started looking for alternatives that required less processing per packet.  In the process, he independently reinventedtransparent bridging, the technique used in modernEthernet switches.However, using switches to connect multiple Ethernet networks in a fault-tolerant fashion requires redundant paths through that network, which in turn requires aspanning treeconfiguration.  This ensures that there is only oneactivepath from any source node to any destination on the network.  This causes centrally located switches to become bottlenecks, limiting scalability as more networks are interconnected.
To help alleviate this problem, Sincoskie invented VLANs by adding a tag to each Ethernet frame.  These tags could be thought of as colors, say red, green, or blue.  In this scheme, each switch could be assigned to handle frames of a single color, and ignore the rest.  The networks could be interconnected with three spanning trees, one for each color.  By sending a mix of different frame colors, the aggregate bandwidth could be improved.  Sincoskie referred to this as amultitree bridge.  He and Chase Cotton created and refined the algorithms necessary to make the system feasible.Thiscoloris what is now known in the Ethernet frame as theIEEE 802.1Qheader, or the VLAN tag. While VLANs are commonly used in modern Ethernet networks, they are not used in the manner first envisioned here.
In 1998, Ethernet VLANs were described in the first edition of theIEEE 802.1Q-1998 standard.This was extended withIEEE 802.1adto allow nested VLAN tags in service of provider bridging. This mechanism was improved withIEEE 802.1ah-2008.
Early network designers often segmented physical LANs with the aim of reducing the size of the Ethernetcollision domain—thus improving performance. When Ethernet switches made this a non-issue (because each switch port is a collision domain), attention turned to reducing the size of thedata link layerbroadcast domain. VLANs were first employed to separate several broadcast domains across one physical medium. A VLAN can also serve to restrict access to network resources without regard to physical topology of the network.
VLANs operate at the data link layer of theOSI model.  Administrators often configure a VLAN to map directly to an IP network, or subnet, which gives the appearance of involving thenetwork layer. Generally, VLANs within the same organization will be assigned different non-overlappingnetwork addressranges. This is not a requirement of VLANs. There is no issue with separate VLANs using identical overlapping address ranges (e.g. two VLANs each use theprivate network192.168.0.0/16). However, it is not possible toroutedata between two networks with overlapping addresses without delicateIP remapping, so if the goal of VLANs is segmentation of a larger overall organizational network, non-overlapping addresses must be used in each separate VLAN.
A basic switch that is not configured for VLANs has VLAN functionality disabled or permanently enabled with adefault VLANthat contains all ports on the device as members.The default VLAN typically uses VLAN identifier 1. Every device connected to one of its ports can send packets to any of the others. Separating ports by VLAN groups separates their traffic very much like connecting each group using a distinct switch for each group.
Remote management of the switch requires that the administrative functions be associated with one or more of the configured VLANs.
In the context of VLANs, the termtrunkdenotes a network link carrying multiple VLANs, which are identified by labels (ortags) inserted into their packets.  Such trunks must run betweentagged portsof VLAN-aware devices, so they are often switch-to-switch or switch-to-routerlinks rather than links to hosts. (Note that the term 'trunk' is also used for what Cisco calls "channels" :Link Aggregation or Port Trunking).  A router (Layer 3 device) serves as thebackbonefor network traffic going across different VLANs. It is only when the VLAN port group is to extend to another device that tagging is used.  Since communications between ports on two different switches travel via the uplink ports of each switch involved, every VLAN containing such ports must also contain the uplink port of each switch involved, and traffic through these ports must be tagged.
Switches typically have no built-in method to indicate VLAN to port associations to someone working in awiring closet.  It is necessary for a technician to either have administrative access to the device to view its configuration, or for VLAN port assignment charts or diagrams to be kept next to the switches in each wiring closet.
The protocol most commonly used today to support VLANs isIEEE 802.1Q.  TheIEEE 802.1working group defined this method of multiplexing VLANs in an effort to provide multivendor VLAN support.  Prior to the introduction of the 802.1Q standard, severalproprietary protocolsexisted, such asCisco Inter-Switch Link(ISL) and3Com's Virtual LAN Trunk (VLT).  Cisco also implemented VLANs overFDDIby carrying VLAN information in anIEEE 802.10frame header, contrary to the purpose of the IEEE 802.10 standard.
Both ISL and IEEE 802.1Q performexplicit tagging– the frame itself is tagged with VLAN identifiers. ISL uses an external tagging process that does not modify the Ethernet frame, while 802.1Q uses a frame-internal field for tagging, and therefore does modify the basic Ethernet frame structure.  This internal tagging allows IEEE 802.1Q to work on both access and trunk links using standard Ethernet hardware.
Under IEEE 802.1Q, the maximum number of VLANs on a given Ethernet network is 4,094 (4,096 values provided by the 12-bitVIDfield minus reserved values at each end of the range, 0 and 4,095).  This does not impose the same limit on the number of IP subnets in such a network since a single VLAN can contain multiple IP subnets.IEEE 802.1adextends the number of VLANs supported by adding support for multiple, nested VLAN tags.IEEE 802.1aq(Shortest Path Bridging) expands the VLAN limit to 16 million. Both improvements have been incorporated into the IEEE 802.1Q standard.
Inter-Switch Link (ISL) is a Cisco proprietary protocol used to interconnect switches and maintain VLAN information as traffic travels between switches on trunk links. ISL is provided as an alternative to IEEE 802.1Q. ISL is available only on some Cisco equipment and has been deprecated.
VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP) is a Cisco proprietary protocol that propagates the definition of VLANs on the whole local area network. VTP is available on most of theCisco CatalystFamily products. The comparable IEEE standard in use by other manufacturers isGARP VLAN Registration Protocol(GVRP) or the more recentMultiple VLAN Registration Protocol(MVRP).
Multiple VLAN Registration Protocol is an application of Multiple Registration Protocol that allows automatic configuration of VLAN information on network switches. Specifically, it provides a method to dynamically share VLAN information and configure the needed VLANs.
VLAN membership can be established either statically or dynamically.
Static VLANs are also referred to as port-based VLANs. Static VLAN assignments are created by assigning ports to a VLAN.  As a device enters the network, the device automatically assumes the VLAN of the port. If the user changes ports and needs access to the same VLAN, the network administrator must manually make a port-to-VLAN assignment for the new connection.
Dynamic VLANs are created using software or by protocol.  With aVLAN Management Policy Server(VMPS), an administrator can assign switch ports to VLANs dynamically based on information such as the source MAC address of the device connected to the port or the username used to log onto that device.  As a device enters the network, the switch queries a database for the VLAN membership of the port that device is connected to. Protocol methods includeMultiple VLAN Registration Protocol(MVRP) and the somewhat obsoleteGARP VLAN Registration Protocol(GVRP).
In a switch that supports protocol-based VLANs, traffic may be handled on the basis of its protocol. Essentially, this segregates or forwards traffic from a port depending on the particular protocol of that traffic; traffic of any other protocol is not forwarded on the port. This allows, for example, IP and IPX traffic to be automatically segregated by the network.
VLAN cross connect (CC or VLAN-XC) is a mechanism used to create Switched VLANs, VLAN CC uses IEEE 802.1ad frames where the S Tag is used as a Label as inMPLS. IEEE approves the use of such a mechanism in part 6.11 ofIEEE 802.1ad-2005.