Intelecommunications,data transfer rateis the average number ofbits(bitrate), characters or symbols (baudrate), or data blocks per unit time passing through a communication link in a data-transmission system. Commondata rate unitsare multiples ofbits per second(bit/s) andbytes per second(B/s). For example, the data rates of modern residential high-speed Internet connections are commonly expressed in megabits per second (Mbit/s).
TheISQsymbols for the bit and byte arebitandB, respectively. In the context of data-rate units, one byte consists of 8 bits, and is synonymous with the unitoctet. The abbreviation bps is often used to mean bit/s, so that when a1 Mbpsconnection is advertised, it usually means that the maximum achievable bandwidth is 1 Mbit/s (one million bits per second), which is 0.125 MB/s (megabyte per second), or about 0.1192 MiB/s (mebibyte per second). TheInstitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers(IEEE) uses the symbol b for bit.
In both theSIand ISQ, the prefix k stands forkilo, meaning 1000, while Ki is the symbol for thebinary prefixkibi-, meaning 1024. The binary prefixes were  introduced in 1998 by theInternational Electrotechnical Commission(IEC) and inIEEE 1541-2002which was reaffirmed on 27 March 2008. The letter K is often used as a non-standard abbreviation for 1,024, especially in "KB" to mean KiB, thekilobyte in its binary sense. In the context of data rates, however, typically only decimal prefixes are used, and they have their standard SI interpretation.
In 1999, the IEC published Amendment 2 to "IEC 60027-2: Letter symbols to be used in electrical technology – Part 2: Telecommunications and electronics". This standard, approved in 1998, introduced the prefixes kibi-, mebi-, gibi-, tebi-, pebi-, and exbi- to be used in specifying binary multiples of a quantity. The name is derived from the first two letters of the original SI prefixes followed by bi (short forbinary). It also clarifies that the SI prefixes are used only to mean powers of 10 and never powers of 2.
These units are often used in a manner inconsistent with the IEC standard.
Kilobit per second(symbolkbit/sorkb/s, often abbreviated "kbps") is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
Megabit per second(symbolMbit/sorMb/s, often abbreviated "Mbps") is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
Gigabit per second(symbolGbit/sorGb/s, often abbreviated "Gbps") is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
Terabit per second(symbolTbit/sorTb/s, sometimes abbreviated "Tbps") is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
These units are often not used in the suggested ways; see§ Variations.
kilobyte per second(kB/s) (sometimes abbreviated "kBps") is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
megabyte per second(MB/s) (can be abbreviated as MBps) is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
gigabyte per second(GB/s) (can be abbreviated as GBps) is a unit of data transfer rate equal to:
terabyte per second(TB/s) (can be abbreviated as TBps) is a unit of data transfer rate equal to: