Avirtual circuit(VC) is a means of transporting data over a data network, based onpacket switchingand in which a connection is first established across the network between two endpoints. The network, rather than having a fixed data rate reservation per connection as incircuit switching, takes advantage of thestatistical multiplexingon its transmission links, an intrinsic feature of packet switching.
A 1978 standardization of virtual circuits by theCCITTimposes per-connectionflow controlsat all user-to-network and network-to-network interfaces. This permits participation incongestion controland reduces the likelihood ofpacket lossin a heavily loaded network.Some circuit protocols providereliable communication servicethrough the use of data retransmissions invoked byerror detectionandautomatic repeat request(ARQ).
Before a virtual circuit may be used, it must be established betweennetwork nodesin thecall setupphase. Once established, abit streamorbyte streammay be exchanged between the nodes, providing abstraction from low-level division intoprotocol data units, and enabling higher-level protocols to operate transparently.
An alternative to virtual-circuit networks aredatagramnetworks.
Virtual circuit communication resemblescircuit switching, since both areconnection oriented, meaning that in both cases data is delivered in correct order, and signaling overhead is required during a connection establishment phase. However, circuit switching provides a constant bit rate and latency, while these may vary in a virtual circuit service due to factors such as:
Intelecommunications, avirtual call capability, sometimes called avirtual call facility, is aservice featurein which:
An alternative approach to virtual calls isconnectionless communicationusingdatagrams.
In the early 1970s,virtual callcapabilitywas developed by British Telecom forEPSS(building on the work ofDonald Daviesat theNational Physical Laboratory). The concept was enhanced byRémi Desprésasvirtual circuitsfor theRCPexperimental network of the FrenchPTT.
Connection orientedtransport layerprotocols such asTCPmay rely on a connectionless packet switching network layer protocol such asIP, where different packets may be routed over different paths, and thus be delivered out of order. However, it is possible to use TCP as a virtual circuit,since TCP includes segment numbering that allows reordering on the receiver side to accommodate out-of-order delivery.
Data link layerandnetwork layervirtual circuit protocols are based on connection-orientedpacket switching, meaning that data is always delivered along the same network path, i.e., through the same nodes. Advantages with this over connectionless packet switching are:
Examples of transport layer protocols that provide a virtual circuit:
Examples of network-layer and data-link-layer virtual circuit protocols, where data always is delivered over the same path:
Switched virtual circuits(SVCs) are generally set up on a per-callbasis and are disconnected when the call is terminated; however, apermanent virtual circuit(PVC) can be established as an option to provide adedicated circuitlinkbetween two facilities.  PVC configuration is usually preconfigured by the service provider.  Unlike SVCs, PVC are usually very seldom broken/disconnected.
A switched virtual circuit (SVC) is a virtual circuit that is dynamically established on demand and is torn down when transmission is complete, for example after a phone call or a file download. SVCs are used in situations where data transmission is sporadic and/or not always between the same data terminal equipment (DTE) endpoints.
A permanent virtual circuit (PVC) is a virtual circuit established for repeated/continuous use between the sameDTE. In a PVC, the long-term association is identical to the data transfer phase of avirtual call. Permanent virtual circuits eliminate the need for repeated call set-up andclearing.