Data terminal equipment(DTE) is an end instrument that convertsuser informationinto signals or reconverts received signals. It is also calleddata processing terminal equipmentortail circuit.A DTE device communicates with thedata circuit-terminating equipment(DCE), such as amodem. The DTE/DCE classification was introduced byIBM.
A DTE is thefunctional unitof a data station (station,terminal)that serves as a data source or a datasinkand provides for thedata communicationcontrol function to be performed in accordance with thelink protocol.
Usually, the DTE device is theterminal(or acomputeremulating a terminal), and the DCE is a modem or another carrier-owned device. The data terminal equipment may be a single piece of equipment or an interconnected subsystem of multiple pieces of equipment that perform all the required functions necessary to permit users to communicate. A user interacts with the DTE (e.g. through ahuman-machine interface), or the DTE may be the user.
Two different types of devices are assumed on each end of the interconnecting cable for a case of simply adding DTE to the topology (e.g. to ahub, DCE), which also brings a less trivial case of interconnection of devices of the same type: DTE-DTE or DCE-DCE. Such cases needcrossover cables, such as for theEthernetornull modemforRS-232.
D-subconnectors follow another rule forpin assignment.
A general rule is that DCE devices provide theclock signal(internal clocking) and the DTE device synchronizes on the provided clock (external clocking).
This term is also generally used in theTelcoandCiscoequipment context to designate a network device, such as terminals, personal computers but also routers and bridges, that's unable or configured not to generate clock signals. Hence a direct PC to PCEthernetconnection can also be called a DTE to DTE communication. This communication is done via anEthernet crossover cableas opposed to a PC to DCE (hub, switch, or bridge) communication which is done via an Ethernet straight cable.
V.35 is a high-speed serial interface designed to support both higher data rates and connectivity between DTEs (data-terminal equipment) or DCEs (data-communication equipment) over digital lines.