Alocal area network(LAN) is acomputer networkthat interconnects computers within a limited area such as a residence, campus, or building,and has itsnetwork equipmentand interconnects locally managed. LANs facilitate the distribution of data and sharing network devices, such as printers.
The LAN contrasts thewide area network(WAN), which not only covers a larger geographic distance, but also generally involvesleased telecommunication circuitsorInternetlinks. An even greater contrast is theInternet, which is a system of globally connected business and personal computers.
EthernetandWi-Fiare the two most common technologies used for local area networks; historical network technologies includeARCNET,Token Ring, andLocalTalk.
Most wired network infrastructures utilizeCategory 5orCategory 6twisted paircabling withRJ45compatible terminations. This medium provides physical connectivity between theEthernetinterfaces present on a large number of IP-aware devices. Depending on the grade of cable and quality of installation, speeds of up to 10 Mbit/s, 100 Mbit/s, 1 Gbit/s, or 10 Gbit/s are supported.
In awireless LAN, users have unrestricted movement within the coverage area. Wireless networks have become popular in residences and small businesses because of their ease of installation, convenience, and flexibility.Most wireless LANs consist of devices containingwirelessradio technology that conforms to802.11standards as certified by theIEEE. Most wireless-capable residential devices operate at both the 2.4GHzand 5 GHz frequencies and fall within the 802.11n or 802.11ac standards.Some older home networking devices operate exclusively at a frequency of 2.4 GHz under 802.11b and 802.11g, or 5 GHz under 802.11a. Some newer devices operate at the aforementioned frequencies in addition to 6 GHz underWi-Fi 6E.Wi-Fiis a marketing and compliance certification for IEEE 802.11 technologies.TheWi-Fi Alliancehas tested compliant products, and certifies them for interoperability. The technology may be integrated intosmartphones,tablet computersandlaptops. Guests are often offeredInternet accessvia ahotspotservice.
Simple LANs in office or school buildings generally consist of cabling and one or morenetwork switches; a switch is used to allow devices on a LAN to talk to one another viaEthernet. A switch can be connected to arouter,cable modem, orADSL modemforInternetaccess. LANs at residential homes usually tend to have a single router and often may include awireless repeater. A LAN can include a wide variety of other network devices such asfirewalls,load balancers, andnetwork intrusion detection.Awireless access pointis required for connecting wireless devices to a network; when a router includes this device, it is referred to as awireless router.
Advanced LANs are characterized by their use of redundant links with switches using thespanning tree protocolto prevent loops, their ability to manage differing traffic types viaquality of service(QoS), and their ability to segregate traffic withVLANs. Anetwork bridgebinds two different LANs or LAN segments to each other, often in order to grant a wired-only device access to a wireless network medium.
Network topologydescribes the layout of interconnections between devices and network segments. At thedata link layerandphysical layer, a wide variety of LAN topologies have been used, includingring,bus,meshandstar. The star topology is the most common in contemporary times. Wireless LAN (WLAN) also has its topologies: independent basic service set (IBSS, anad-hoc network) where each node connects directly to each other (this is also standardized asWi-Fi Direct), or basic service set (BSS, an infrastructure network that uses anwireless access point).
DHCPis used to assign internal IP addresses to members of a local area network. A DHCP server typically runs on the routerwith end devices as its clients. All DHCP clients request configuration settings using the DHCP protocol in order to acquire theirIP address, adefault routeand one or moreDNS serveraddresses. Once the client implements these settings, it will be able to communicate on thatinternet.
At the higher network layers, protocols such asNetBIOS,IPX/SPX,AppleTalkand others were once common, but theInternet protocol suite(TCP/IP) has prevailed as the standard of choice for almost all local area networks today.
LANs can maintain connections with other LANs via leased lines, leased services, or across theInternetusingvirtual private networktechnologies. Depending on how the connections are established and secured, and the distance involved, such linked LANs may also be classified as ametropolitan area network(MAN) or awide area network(WAN).
Local area networks may be connected to theInternet(a type ofWAN) via fixed-line means (such as aDSL/ADSLmodem) or alternatively using a cellular or satellitemodem. These would additionally make use of telephone wires such asVDSLandVDSL2, coaxial cables, orfiber to the homefor running fiber-optic cables directly into a house or office building, or alternatively a cellular modem orsatellite dishin the latter non-fixed cases. WithInternet access, theInternet service provider (ISP)would grant a single WAN-facingIP addressto the network. A router is configured with the provider's IP address on the WAN interface, which is shared among all devices in the LAN bynetwork address translation.
Agatewayestablishesphysicalanddata link layerconnectivity to a WAN over a service provider's native telecommunications infrastructure. Such devices typically contain acable,DSL, oroptical modembound to anetwork interface controllerfor Ethernet. Home and small business class routers are often incorporated into these devices for additional convenience, and they often also have integratedwireless access pointand 4-port Ethernetswitch.
TheITU-TG.hnandIEEEPowerlinestandard, which provide high-speed (up to 1 Gbit/s) local area networking over existing home wiring, are examples of home networking technology designed specifically forIPTVdelivery.
The increasing demand and usage of computers in universities and research labs in the late 1960s generated the need to provide high-speed interconnections between computer systems. A 1970 report from theLawrence Radiation Laboratorydetailing the growth of their "Octopus" network gave a good indication of the situation.
A number of experimental and early commercial LAN technologies were developed in the 1970s.Ethernetwas developed atXerox PARCbetween 1973 and 1974.TheCambridge Ringwas developed at Cambridge University starting in 1974.ARCNETwas developed byDatapointCorporation in 1976 and announced in 1977.It had the first commercial installation in December 1977 atChase Manhattan Bankin New York.In 1979,theelectronic voting system for the European Parliamentwas the first installation of a LAN connecting hundreds (420) of microprocessor-controlled voting terminals to a polling/selecting central unit with amultidrop buswithMaster/slave (technology)arbitration.It used 10 kilometers of simpleunshielded twisted paircategory 3 cable—the same cable used for telephone systems—installed inside the benches of the European Parliament  Hemicycles in Strasbourg and Luxembourg.
The development and proliferation ofpersonal computersusing theCP/Moperating system in the late 1970s, and laterDOS-based systems starting in 1981, meant that many sites grew to dozens or even hundreds of computers. The initial driving force for networking was to sharestorageandprinters, both of which were expensive at the time. There was much enthusiasm for the concept, and for several years, from about 1983 onward, computer industry pundits habitually declared the coming year to be, "The year of the LAN".
In practice, the concept was marred by the proliferation of incompatiblephysical layerandnetwork protocolimplementations, and a plethora of methods of sharing resources. Typically, each vendor would have its own type of network card, cabling, protocol, andnetwork operating system. A solution appeared with the advent ofNovell NetWarewhich provided even-handed support for dozens of competing card and cable types, and a much more sophisticated operating system than most of its competitors.
Of the competitors to NetWare, onlyBanyan Vineshad comparable technical strengths, but Banyan never gained a secure base.3Comproduced3+Shareand Microsoft producedMS-Net. These then formed the basis for collaboration betweenMicrosoftand 3Com to create a simple network operating systemLAN Managerand its cousin, IBM'sLAN Server. None of these enjoyed any lasting success; Netware dominated the personal computer LAN business from early after its introduction in 1983 until the mid-1990s when Microsoft introducedWindows NT.
In 1983, TCP/IP was first shown capable of supporting actual defense department applications on a Defense Communication Agency LAN testbed located at Reston, Virginia.The TCP/IP-based LAN successfully supportedTelnet,FTP, and a Defense Department teleconferencing application.This demonstrated the feasibility of employing TCP/IP LANs to interconnectWorldwide Military Command and Control System(WWMCCS) computers at command centers throughout the United States.However, WWMCCS was superseded by theGlobal Command and Control System(GCCS) before that could happen.
During the same period,Unix workstationswere using TCP/IP networking. Although the workstation market segment is now much reduced, the technologies developed in the area continue to be influential on the Internet and in all forms of networking—and the TCP/IP protocol has replacedIPX,AppleTalk,NBF, and other protocols used by the early PC LANs.
Econetwas Acorn Computers's low-cost local area network system, intended for use by schools and small businesses. It was first developed for theAcorn AtomandAcorn System 2/3/4computers in 1981.
In the 1980s, several token ring network implementations for LANs were developed.IBM released their own implementation of token ring in 1985,It ran at4Mbit/s.IBM claimed that their token ring systems were superior to Ethernet, especially under load, but these claims were debated.IBM's implementation of token ring was the basis of the IEEE 802.5 standard.A 16 Mbit/s version of Token Ring was standardized by the 802.5 working group in 1989.IBM had market dominance over Token Ring, for example, in 1990, IBM equipment was the most widely used for Token Ring networks.
Fiber Distributed Data Interface(FDDI), a LAN standard, was considered an attractive campusbackbone networktechnology in the early to mid 1990s since existing Ethernet networks only offered 10 Mbit/s data rates and Token Ring networks only offered 4 Mbit/s or 16 Mbit/s rates. Thus it was a relatively high-speed choice of that era, with speeds such as 100 Mbit/s.
By 1994, vendors includedCisco Systems,National Semiconductor, Network Peripherals, SysKonnect (acquired byMarvell Technology Group), and3Com.FDDI installations have largely been replaced by Ethernet deployments.