Adigital subscriber line access multiplexer(DSLAM, often pronouncedDEE-slam) is a network device, often located intelephone exchanges, that connects multiple customerdigital subscriber line(DSL) interfaces to a high-speed digital communications channel usingmultiplexingtechniques.Itscable internet(DOCSIS) counterpart is thecable modem termination system.
The DSLAM equipment collects the data from its many modem ports and aggregates their voice and data traffic into one complex composite "signal" viamultiplexing. Depending on its device architecture and setup, a DSLAM aggregates the DSL lines over itsAsynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM),Frame Relay, and/orInternet Protocolnetwork, i.e., an IP-DSLAM using Packet Transfer Mode - Transmission Convergence (PTM-TC) protocol(s) stack.
The aggregated traffic is then directed to a telco'sbackboneswitch, via anaccess network(AN), also called aNetwork Service Provider(NSP), at up to 10Gbit/sdata rates.
The DSLAM acts like anetwork switchsince its functionality is at thelink layer. Therefore, it cannot re-route traffic between multiple IP networks, only betweenISPdevices and end-user connection points. The DSLAM traffic is switched to aBroadband Remote Access Serverwhere the end-user traffic is then routed across the ISP network to the Internet.Customer-premises equipmentthat interfaces well with the DSLAM to which it is connected may take advantage of enhanced telephone voice and data line signaling features and the bandwidth monitoring and compensation capabilities it supports.
A DSLAM may or may not be located in the telephone exchange, and may also serve multiple data and voice customers within a neighborhoodserving area interface, sometimes in conjunction with adigital loop carrier. DSLAMs are also used by hotels, lodges, residential neighborhoods, and other businesses operating their own privatetelephone exchange.
In addition to being a data switch and multiplexer, a DSLAM is also a large collection of modems. Each modem on the aggregation card communicates with a single subscriber'sDSL modem. This modem functionality is integrated into the DSLAM itself instead of being done via individual external devices like 20th-century voicebandmodemsused for dial-up internet.
Like traditional voice-band modems, a DSLAM's integrated DSL modems are usually able to probe the line and to adjust themselves to electronically or digitally compensate forforward echoesand other bandwidth-limiting factors in order to move data at the maximum possible connection rate.
This compensation capability also takes advantage of the better performance of "balanced line" DSL connections, providing capabilities for LAN segments longer than physically similarunshielded twisted pair(UTP)Ethernetconnections, since the balanced line type is generally required for its hardware to function correctly. This is due to the nominalline impedance(measured in Ohms but comprising bothresistanceandinductance) of balanced lines being somewhat lower than that of UTP, thus supporting 'weaker' signals (however the solid-state electronics required to construct such digital interfaces are more costly). Many early DSLAMs required a separate splitter rack to split POTS service from ADSL service,but newer DSLAMs can be connected directly to phone lines as they have built-in splitters.
Balanced pair cable has higherattenuationat higher frequencies. Therefore, the longer the wire between DSLAM and subscriber, the slower the maximum possible data rate due to the lower frequencies being used to limit the total attenuation (or due to the higher number of errors at higher frequencies, effectively lowering the overall frequency/data rate). The following is a rough guide to the relation between wire distance (based on 0.40 mm copper andADSL2+technology) and maximum data rate. Local conditions may vary, especially beyond 2 km, often necessitating a closer DSLAM to bring acceptable bandwidths:
Customers connect to the DSLAM throughADSL modemsor DSLrouters, which are connected to thePSTNnetwork via typicalunshielded twisted pairtelephone lines. Each DSLAM has multiple aggregation cards, and each such card can have multipleportsto which the customers' lines are connected. Typically a single DSLAM aggregation card has 24 ports, but this number can vary with each manufacturer.
The most common DSLAMs are housed in atelco-grade chassis, which are supplied with (nominal) 48 voltsDC. Hence a typical DSLAM setup may contain power converters, DSLAM chassis, aggregation cards, cabling, and upstream links.
On the upstream trunk (ISP) side many early DSLAMs usedATM—and this approach was standardized by theDSL Forum—withGigabit Ethernetsupport appearing sometime later.Today, the most common upstream links in these DSLAMs useGigabit Ethernetor multi-gigabitfiber opticlinks.
IP-DSLAM stands forInternet ProtocolDigital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer. User traffic is mostly IP based.
Traditional 20th century DSLAMs usedAsynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM) technology to connect to upstream ATM routers/switches. The DSLAM simply extracted the ATM signals from the DSL signal, and passed the ATM signal to ATM routers, which then extract the IP traffic and pass it on to an IP router in an IP network. This division of work was thought to be sensible because DSL itself is based on ATM, and could theoretically carry data other than IP in that ATM stream. In contrast, an IP-DSLAM extracts the IP traffic in the DSLAM itself and passes it on to an IP router. The advantages of IP-DSLAM over a traditional ATM DSLAM are that the merged equipment is less expensive to make and operate and can offer a richer set of features.