Ethernet(/ˈiːθərnɛt/EE-thər-net) is a family of wiredcomputer networkingtechnologies commonly used inlocal area networks(LAN),metropolitan area networks(MAN) andwide area networks(WAN).It was commercially introduced in 1980 and first standardized in 1983 asIEEE 802.3. Ethernet has since been refined to support higherbit rates, a greater number of nodes, and longer link distances, but retains muchbackward compatibility. Over time, Ethernet has largely replaced competing wired LAN technologies such asToken Ring,FDDIandARCNET.
The original10BASE5Ethernet uses a thickcoaxial cableas ashared medium. This was largely superseded by10BASE2, which used a thinner and more flexible cable that was both cheaper and easier to use. More modern Ethernet variants usetwisted pairandfiber opticlinks in conjunction withswitches. Over the course of its history, Ethernet data transfer rates have been increased from the original2.94Mbit/sto the latest800 Gbit/s, with rates up to1.6Tbit/sunder development. TheEthernet standardsinclude severalwiring and signaling variantsof theOSI physical layer.
Systems communicating over Ethernet divide a stream of data into shorter pieces calledframes. Each frame contains source and destination addresses, anderror-checking dataso that damaged frames can be detected and discarded; most often, higher-layer protocols triggerretransmissionof lost frames. Per theOSI model, Ethernet provides services up to and including thedata link layer.The 48-bitMAC addresswas adopted by otherIEEE 802networking standards, includingIEEE 802.11(Wi-Fi), as well as byFDDI.EtherTypevalues are also used inSubnetwork Access Protocol(SNAP) headers.
Ethernet is widely used in homes and industry, and interworks well with wirelessWi-Fitechnologies. TheInternet Protocolis commonly carried over Ethernet and so it is considered one of the key technologies that make up theInternet.
Ethernet was developed atXerox PARCbetween 1973 and 1974as a means to allowAlto computersto communicate with each other.It was inspired byALOHAnet, whichRobert Metcalfehad studied as part of hisPhDdissertationand was originally called the Alto Aloha Network.Metcalfe's idea was essentially to limit the Aloha-like signals inside a cable, instead of broadcasting into the air. The idea was first documented in a memo that Metcalfe wrote on May 22, 1973, where he named it after theluminiferous aetheronce postulated to exist as an "omnipresent, completely passive medium for the propagation of electromagnetic waves."
In 1975,Xeroxfiled a patent application listing Metcalfe,David Boggs,Chuck Thacker, andButler Lampsonas inventors.In 1976, after the system was deployed at PARC, Metcalfe and Boggs published a seminal paper.Ron Crane,Yogen Dalal,Robert Garner, Hal Murray, Roy Ogus, Dave Redell andJohn Shochfacilitated the upgrade from the original 2.94 Mbit/s protocol to the 10 Mbit/s protocol, which was released to the market in 1980.
Metcalfe left Xerox in June 1979 to form3Com.He convincedDigital Equipment Corporation(DEC),Intel, and Xerox to work together to promote Ethernet as a standard. As part of that process Xerox agreed to relinquish their 'Ethernet' trademark.The first standard was published on September 30, 1980, as "The Ethernet, A Local Area Network. Data Link Layer and Physical Layer Specifications". This so-called DIX standard (Digital Intel Xerox)specified 10 Mbit/s Ethernet, with 48-bit destination and source addresses and a global 16-bitEthertype-type field.Version 2 was published in November 1982and defines what has become known asEthernet II. Formalstandardization effortsproceeded at the same time and resulted in the publication ofIEEE 802.3on June 23, 1983.
Ethernet initially competed withToken Ringand otherproprietary protocols. Ethernet was able to adapt to market needs, and with 10BASE2 shift to inexpensive thin coaxial cable, and from 1990 to the now-ubiquitoustwisted pairwith 10BASE-T. By the end of the 1980s, Ethernet was clearly the dominant network technology.In the process, 3Com became a major company. 3Com shipped its first 10 Mbit/s Ethernet 3C100NICin March 1981, and that year started selling adapters forPDP-11sandVAXes, as well asMultibus-based Intel andSun Microsystemscomputers.This was followed quickly by DEC'sUnibusto Ethernet adapter, which DEC sold and used internally to build its own corporate network, which reached over 10,000 nodes by 1986, making it one of the largest computer networks in the world at that time.An Ethernet adapter card for the IBM PC was released in 1982, and, by 1985, 3Com had sold 100,000.In the 1980s, IBM's ownPC Networkproduct competed with Ethernet for the PC, and through the 1980s, LAN hardware, in general, was not common on PCs. However, in the mid to late 1980s, PC networking did become popular in offices and schools for printer and fileserver sharing, and among the many diverse competing LAN technologies of that decade, Ethernet was one of the most popular.Parallel portbased Ethernet adapters were produced for a time, with drivers for DOS and Windows. By the early 1990s, Ethernet became so prevalent that Ethernet ports began to appear on some PCs and mostworkstations. This process was greatly sped up with the introduction of 10BASE-T and its relatively smallmodular connector, at which point Ethernet ports appeared even on low-end motherboards.
Since then, Ethernet technology has evolved to meet new bandwidth and market requirements.In addition to computers, Ethernet is now used to interconnect appliances and otherpersonal devices.AsIndustrial Ethernetit is used in industrial applications and is quickly replacing legacy data transmission systems in the world's telecommunications networks.By 2010, the market for Ethernet equipment amounted to over $16 billion per year.
In February 1980, theInstitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers(IEEE) started project802to standardize local area networks (LAN).The DIX group with Gary Robinson (DEC), Phil Arst (Intel), and Bob Printis (Xerox) submitted the so-calledBlue BookCSMA/CDspecification as a candidate for the LAN specification.In addition to CSMA/CD, Token Ring (supported by IBM) and Token Bus (selected and henceforward supported byGeneral Motors) were also considered as candidates for a LAN standard. Competing proposals and broad interest in the initiative led to strong disagreement over which technology to standardize. In December 1980, the group was split into three subgroups, and standardization proceeded separately for each proposal.
Delays in the standards process put at risk the market introduction of theXerox Starworkstation and 3Com's Ethernet LAN products. With such business implications in mind,David Liddle(General Manager, Xerox Office Systems) and Metcalfe (3Com) strongly supported a proposal of Fritz Röscheisen (SiemensPrivate Networks) for an alliance in the emerging office communication market, including Siemens' support for the international standardization of Ethernet (April 10, 1981). Ingrid Fromm, Siemens' representative to IEEE 802, quickly achieved broader support for Ethernet beyond IEEE by the establishment of a competing Task Group "Local Networks" within the European standards body ECMA TC24. In March 1982, ECMA TC24 with its corporate members reached an agreement on a standard for CSMA/CD based on the IEEE 802 draft.Because the DIX proposal was most technically complete and because of the speedy action taken by ECMA which decisively contributed to the conciliation of opinions within IEEE, the IEEE 802.3 CSMA/CD standard was approved in December 1982.IEEE published the 802.3 standard as a draft in 1983 and as a standard in 1985.
Approval of Ethernet on the international level was achieved by a similar, cross-partisanaction with Fromm as theliaison officerworking to integrate withInternational Electrotechnical Commission(IEC) Technical Committee 83 andInternational Organization for Standardization(ISO) Technical Committee 97 Sub Committee 6. The ISO 8802-3 standard was published in 1989.
Ethernet has evolved to include higher bandwidth, improvedmedium access controlmethods, and different physical media. Themultidropcoaxial cable was replaced with physical point-to-point links connected byEthernet repeatersorswitches.
Ethernet stations communicate by sending each otherdata packets: blocks of data individually sent and delivered. As with other IEEE 802 LANs, adapters come programmed with globally unique 48-bitMAC addressso that each Ethernet station has a unique address.The MAC addresses are used to specify both the destination and the source of each data packet. Ethernet establishes link-level connections, which can be defined using both the destination and source addresses. On reception of a transmission, the receiver uses the destination address to determine whether the transmission is relevant to the station or should be ignored. A network interface normally does not accept packets addressed to other Ethernet stations.
An EtherType field in each frame is used by the operating system on the receiving station to select the appropriate protocol module (e.g., anInternet Protocolversion such asIPv4).Ethernet framesare said to beself-identifying, because of the EtherType field. Self-identifying frames make it possible to intermix multiple protocols on the same physical network and allow a single computer to use multiple protocols together.Despite the evolution of Ethernet technology, all generations of Ethernet (excluding early experimental versions) use the same frame formats.Mixed-speed networks can be built using Ethernet switches and repeaters supporting the desired Ethernet variants.
Due to the ubiquity of Ethernet, and the ever-decreasing cost of the hardware needed to support it, by 2004 most manufacturers built Ethernet interfaces directly intoPC motherboards, eliminating the need for a separate network card.
Ethernet was originally based on the idea of computers communicating over a shared coaxial cable acting as a broadcast transmission medium. The method used was similar to those used in radio systems,with the common cable providing the communication channel likened to theLuminiferous aetherin 19th-century physics, and it was from this reference that the nameEthernetwas derived.
Original Ethernet's shared coaxial cable (the shared medium) traversed a building or campus to every attached machine. A scheme known ascarrier-sense multiple access with collision detection(CSMA/CD) governed the way the computers shared the channel. This scheme was simpler than competing Token Ring orToken Bustechnologies.Computers are connected to anAttachment Unit Interface(AUI)transceiver, which is in turn connected to the cable (withthin Ethernetthe transceiver is usually integrated into the network adapter). While a simple passive wire is highly reliable for small networks, it is not reliable for large extended networks, where damage to the wire in a single place, or a single bad connector, can make the whole Ethernet segment unusable.
Through the first half of the 1980s, Ethernet's10BASE5implementation used a coaxial cable 0.375 inches (9.5 mm) in diameter, later calledthick Ethernetorthicknet. Its successor,10BASE2, calledthin Ethernetorthinnet, used theRG-58coaxial cable. The emphasis was on making installation of the cable easier and less costly.
Since all communication happens on the same wire, any information sent by one computer is received by all, even if that information is intended for just one destination.The network interface card interrupts theCPUonly when applicable packets are received: the card ignores information not addressed to it.Use of a single cable also means that the data bandwidth is shared, such that, for example, available data bandwidth to each device is halved when two stations are simultaneously active.
A collision happens when two stations attempt to transmit at the same time. They corrupt transmitted data and require stations to re-transmit. The lost data and re-transmission reduces throughput. In the worst case, where multiple active hosts connected with maximum allowed cable length attempt to transmit many short frames, excessive collisions can reduce throughput dramatically. However, aXeroxreport in 1980 studied performance of an existing Ethernet installation under both normal and artificially generated heavy load. The report claimed that 98% throughput on the LAN was observed.This is in contrast withtoken passingLANs (Token Ring, Token Bus), all of which suffer throughput degradation as each new node comes into the LAN, due to token waits. This report was controversial, as modeling showed that collision-based networks theoretically became unstable under loads as low as 37% of nominal capacity. Many early researchers failed to understand these results. Performance on real networks is significantly better.
In a modern Ethernet, the stations do not all share one channel through a shared cable or a simplerepeater hub; instead, each station communicates with a switch, which in turn forwards that traffic to the destination station. In this topology, collisions are only possible if station and switch attempt to communicate with each other at the same time, and collisions are limited to this link. Furthermore, the10BASE-Tstandard introduced afull duplexmode of operation which became common withFast Ethernetand the de facto standard withGigabit Ethernet. In full duplex, switch and station can send and receive simultaneously, and therefore modern Ethernets are completely collision-free.
For signal degradation and timing reasons, coaxialEthernet segmentshave a restricted size.Somewhat larger networks can be built by using anEthernet repeater. Early repeaters had only two ports, allowing, at most, a doubling of network size. Once repeaters with more than two ports became available, it was possible to wire the network in astar topology. Early experiments with star topologies (calledFibernet) usingoptical fiberwere published by 1978.
Shared cable Ethernet is always hard to install in offices because its bus topology is in conflict with the star topology cable plans designed into buildings for telephony. Modifying Ethernet to conform to twisted-pair telephone wiring already installed in commercial buildings provided another opportunity to lower costs, expand the installed base, and leverage building design, and, thus, twisted-pair Ethernet was the next logical development in the mid-1980s.
Ethernet on unshielded twisted-pair cables (UTP) began withStarLANat 1 Mbit/s in the mid-1980s. In 1987SynOpticsintroduced the first twisted-pair Ethernet at 10 Mbit/s in a star-wired cabling topology with a central hub, later calledLattisNet.These evolved into 10BASE-T, which was designed for point-to-point links only, and all termination was built into the device. This changed repeaters from a specialist device used at the center of large networks to a device that every twisted pair-based network with more than two machines had to use. The tree structure that resulted from this made Ethernet networks easier to maintain by preventing most faults with one peer or its associated cable from affecting other devices on the network.
Despite the physical star topology and the presence of separate transmit and receive channels in the twisted pair and fiber media, repeater-based Ethernet networks still use half-duplex and CSMA/CD, with only minimal activity by the repeater, primarily generation of thejam signalin dealing with packet collisions. Every packet is sent to every other port on the repeater, so bandwidth and security problems are not addressed. The total throughput of the repeater is limited to that of a single link, and all links must operate at the same speed.
While repeaters can isolate some aspects ofEthernet segments, such as cable breakages, they still forward all traffic to all Ethernet devices. The entire network is onecollision domain, and all hosts have to be able to detect collisions anywhere on the network. This limits the number of repeaters between the farthest nodes and creates practical limits on how many machines can communicate on an Ethernet network. Segments joined by repeaters have to all operate at the same speed, making phased-in upgrades impossible.
To alleviate these problems, bridging was created to communicate at the data link layer while isolating the physical layer. With bridging, only well-formed Ethernet packets are forwarded from one Ethernet segment to another; collisions and packet errors are isolated. At initial startup, Ethernet bridges work somewhat like Ethernet repeaters, passing all traffic between segments. By observing the source addresses of incoming frames, the bridge then builds an address table associating addresses to segments. Once an address is learned, the bridge forwards network traffic destined for that address only to the associated segment, improving overall performance.Broadcasttraffic is still forwarded to all network segments. Bridges also overcome the limits on total segments between two hosts and allow the mixing of speeds, both of which are critical to the incremental deployment of faster Ethernet variants.
In 1989,Motorola Codexintroduced their 6310 EtherSpan, andKalpanaintroduced their EtherSwitch; these were examples of the first commercial Ethernet switches.Early switches such as this usedcut-through switchingwhere only the header of the incoming packet is examined before it is either dropped or forwarded to another segment.This reduces the forwarding latency. One drawback of this method is that it does not readily allow a mixture of different link speeds. Another is that packets that have been corrupted are still propagated through the network. The eventual remedy for this was a return to the originalstore and forwardapproach of bridging, where the packet is read into a buffer on the switch in its entirety, itsframe check sequenceverified and only then the packet is forwarded.In modern network equipment, this process is typically done usingapplication-specific integrated circuitsallowing packets to be forwarded atwire speed.
When a twisted pair or fiber link segment is used and neither end is connected to a repeater,full-duplexEthernet becomes possible over that segment. In full-duplex mode, both devices can transmit and receive to and from each other at the same time, and there is no collision domain.This doubles the aggregate bandwidth of the link and is sometimes advertised as double the link speed (for example, 200 Mbit/s for Fast Ethernet).The elimination of the collision domain for these connections also means that all the link's bandwidth can be used by the two devices on that segment and that segment length is not limited by the constraints of collision detection.
Since packets are typically delivered only to the port they are intended for, traffic on a switched Ethernet is less public than on shared-medium Ethernet.Despite this, switched Ethernet should still be regarded as an insecure network technology, because it is easy to subvert switched Ethernet systems by means such asARP spoofingandMAC flooding.
The bandwidth advantages, the improved isolation of devices from each other, the ability to easily mix different speeds of devices and the elimination of the chaining limits inherent in non-switched Ethernet have made switched Ethernet the dominant network technology.
Simple switched Ethernet networks, while a great improvement over repeater-based Ethernet, suffer from single points of failure, attacks that trick switches or hosts into sending data to a machine even if it is not intended for it, scalability and security issues with regard toswitching loops,broadcast radiation, andmulticasttraffic.
Advanced networking features in switches useShortest Path Bridging(SPB) or theSpanning Tree Protocol(STP) to maintain a loop-free, meshed network, allowing physical loops for redundancy (STP) or load-balancing (SPB). Shortest Path Bridging includes the use of thelink-state routing protocolIS-ISto allow larger networks with shortest path routes between devices.
Advanced networking features also ensure port security, provide protection features such as MAC lockdownand broadcast radiation filtering, useVLANsto keep different classes of users separate while using the same physical infrastructure, employmultilayer switchingto route between different classes, and uselink aggregationto add bandwidth to overloaded links and to provide some redundancy.
In 2016, Ethernet replacedInfiniBandas the most popular system interconnect ofTOP500supercomputers.
The Ethernet physical layer evolved over a considerable time span and encompasses coaxial, twisted pair and fiber-optic physical media interfaces, with speeds from1 Mbit/sto400 Gbit/s.The first introduction of twisted-pair CSMA/CD wasStarLAN, standardized as 802.3 1BASE5.While 1BASE5 had little market penetration, it defined the physical apparatus (wire, plug/jack, pin-out, and wiring plan) that would be carried over to 10BASE-T through 10GBASE-T.
The most common forms used are10BASE-T, 100BASE-TX, and 1000BASE-T. All three use twisted-pair cables and8P8C modular connectors. They run at10 Mbit/s,100 Mbit/s, and1 Gbit/s, respectively.
Fiber opticvariants of Ethernet (that commonly useSFP modules) are also very popular in larger networks, offering high performance, better electrical isolation and longer distance (tens of kilometers with some versions). In general, networkprotocol stacksoftware will work similarly on all varieties.
In IEEE 802.3, adatagramis called apacketorframe.Packetis used to describe the overall transmission unit and includes thepreamble,start frame delimiter(SFD) and carrier extension (if present).Theframebegins after the start frame delimiter with a frame header featuring source and destination MAC addresses and the EtherType field giving either the protocol type for the payload protocol or the length of the payload. The middle section of the frame consists of payload data including any headers for other protocols (for example, Internet Protocol) carried in the frame. The frame ends with a 32-bitcyclic redundancy check, which is used to detect corruption ofdata in transit.Notably, Ethernet packets have notime-to-live field, leading to possible problems in the presence of a switching loop.
Autonegotiation is the procedure by which two connected devices choose common transmission parameters, e.g. speed and duplex mode. Autonegotiation was initially an optional feature, first introduced with 100BASE-TX (1995 IEEE 802.3u Fast Ethernet standard), and is backward compatible with 10BASE-T. The specification was improved in the 1998 release of IEEE 802.3. Autonegotiation is mandatory for 1000BASE-T and faster.
A switching loop or bridge loop occurs incomputer networkswhen there is more than oneLayer 2(OSI model) path between two endpoints (e.g. multiple connections between twonetwork switchesor two ports on the same switch connected to each other). The loop createsbroadcast stormsas broadcasts andmulticastsare forwarded by switches out everyport, the switch or switches will repeatedly rebroadcast the broadcast messages flooding the network. Since the Layer 2 header does not support atime to live(TTL) value, if a frame is sent into a looped topology, it can loop forever.
A physical topology that contains switching or bridge loops is attractive for redundancy reasons, yet a switched network must not have loops. The solution is to allow physical loops, but create a loop-free logical topology using the SPB protocol or the older STP on the network switches.
A node that is sending longer than the maximum transmission window for an Ethernet packet is considered to bejabbering. Depending on the physical topology, jabber detection and remedy differ somewhat.