AMAC address(short formedium access control addressormedia access control address) is aunique identifierassigned to anetwork interface controller(NIC) for use as anetwork addressin communications within anetwork segment. This use is common in mostIEEE 802networking technologies, includingEthernet,Wi-Fi, andBluetooth. Within theOpen Systems Interconnection (OSI) network model, MAC addresses are used in themedium access controlprotocol sublayer of thedata link layer. As typically represented, MAC addresses are recognizable as six groups of twohexadecimaldigits, separated by hyphens, colons, or without a separator.
MAC addresses are primarily assigned by device manufacturers, and are therefore often referred to as theburned-in address, or as anEthernet hardware address,hardware address, orphysical address. Each address can be stored in the interface hardware, such as itsread-only memory, or by afirmwaremechanism. Many network interfaces, however, support changing their MAC addresses. The address typically includes a manufacturer'sorganizationally unique identifier(OUI). MAC addresses are formed according to the principles of two numbering spaces based on extended unique identifiers (EUIs) managed by theInstitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers(IEEE):EUI-48—which replaces the obsolete termMAC-48—andEUI-64.
Network nodeswith multiple network interfaces, such asroutersandmultilayer switches, must have a unique MAC address for each network interface in the same network. However, two network interfaces connected to two different networks can share the same MAC address.
TheIEEE 802MAC address originally comes from theXerox Network SystemsEthernet addressing scheme.This48-bitaddress space contains potentially 2(over 281 trillion) possible MAC addresses. TheIEEEmanages the allocation of MAC addresses, originally known as MAC-48 and now called EUI-48 identifiers. The IEEE has a target lifetime of 100 years (until 2080) for applications using EUI-48 space and restricts applications accordingly. The IEEE encourages adoption of the more plentiful EUI-64 for non-Ethernet applications.
The distinctions between EUI-48 and MAC-48 identifiers are in name and application only. MAC-48 was used to address hardware interfaces within existing 802-based networking applications; EUI-48 is now used for 802-based networking and is also used to identify other devices and software, for exampleBluetooth.The IEEE now considersMAC-48to be an obsolete term.EUI-48is now used in all cases. In addition, the EUI-64 numbering system originally encompassed both MAC-48 and EUI-48 identifiers by a simple translation mechanism.These translations have since been deprecated.
TheIndividual Address Block(IAB) is an inactive registry which has been replaced by theMA-S(MAC address block, small), previously namedOUI-36, and has no overlaps in addresses with the IABregistry product as of January 1, 2014. The IAB uses an OUI from theMA-L(MAC address block, large) registry, previously called theOUIregistry. The termOUIis still in use,but the IEEE Registration Authority does not administer them. An OUI is concatenated with 12 additional IEEE-provided bits (for a total of 36 bits), leaving only 12 bits for the organisation owning the IAB to assign to its (up to 4096) individual devices. An IAB is ideal for organizations requiring not more than 4096 unique 48-bit numbers (EUI-48). Unlike an OUI, which allows the assignee to assign values in various number spaces (for example, EUI-48, EUI-64, and the various context-dependent identifier number spaces, as inSNAPorEDID), the Individual Address Block could only be used to assign EUI-48 identifiers. All other potential uses based on the OUI from which the IABs are allocated are reserved and remain the property of the IEEE Registration Authority. Between 2007 and September 2012, the OUI value 00:50:C2 was used for IAB assignments. After September 2012, the value 40:D8:55 was used. Owners of an already assigned IAB may continue to use it.
The MA-S registry includes, for each registrant, both a 36-bit unique number used in some standards and a block of EUI-48 and EUI-64 identifiers (while the registrant of an IAB cannot assign an EUI-64). MA-S does not include assignment of an OUI.
Additionally, theMA-M(MAC address block, medium) provides both 2EUI-48 identifiers and 2EUI-64 identifiers, the first 28 bits being assigned by IEEE. The first 24 bits of the assigned MA-M block are an OUI assigned to IEEE that will not be reassigned, so the MA-M does not include assignment of an OUI.
Addresses can either be universally administered addresses (UAA) or locally administered addresses (LAA). A universally administered address is uniquely assigned to a device by its manufacturer. The first three octets (in transmission order) identify the organization that issued the identifier and are known as theorganizationally unique identifier(OUI).The remainder of the address (three octets in EUI-48 or five in EUI-64) are assigned by that organization in nearly any manner they please, subject to the constraint of uniqueness. A locally administered address is assigned to a device by software or a network administrator, overriding the burned-in address of a physical device.
Locally administered addresses are distinguished from universally administered addresses by setting (assigning the value of 1 to) the second-least-significant bitof the first octet of the address. This bit is also referred to as theU/Lbit, short forUniversal/Local, which identifies how the address is administered.If the bit is 0, the address is universally administered, which is why this bit is 0 in all UAAs. If it is 1, the address is locally administered. In the example address06-00-00-00-00-00, the first octet is 06 (hexadecimal), the binary form of which is 00000110, where the second-least-significant bit is 1. Therefore, it is a locally administered address.Even though manyhypervisorsmanage dynamic MAC addresseswithin their own OUI, often it is useful to create an entire unique MAC within the LAA range.
Invirtualisation, hypervisors such asQEMUandXenhave their own OUIs. Each new virtual machine is started with a MAC address set by assigning the last three bytes to be unique on the local network. While this is local administration of MAC addresses, it is not an LAA in the IEEE sense.
A historical example of this hybrid situation is theDECnetprotocol, where the universal MAC address (with Digital Equipment Corporation's OUI AA-00-04) is administered locally. The DECnet software sets the last three bytes of the complete MAC address to00-XX-YY(so that the full MAC address isAA-00-04-00-XX-YY), whereXX-YYreflects the host's DECnet network addressxx.yy. This eliminates the need for DECnet to have anaddress resolution protocolsince the MAC address of any DECnet host can be determined from its DECnet address.
The least significant bit of an address's first octet is referred to as theI/G, orIndividual/Group, bit.When this bit is 0 (zero), theframeis meant to reach only one receivingnetwork interface.This type of transmission is calledunicast. A unicast frame is transmitted to all nodes within thecollision domain. In a modern wired setting (i.e. withswitches, not simplehubs) the collision domain usually is the length of the Ethernet cabling between two network interfaces. In a wireless setting, the collision domain is all receivers that can detect a given wireless signal. If aswitchdoes not know which port leads to a given MAC address, the switch will forward a unicast frame to all of its ports (except the originating port), an action known asunicast flood.Only the node with the matching hardware MAC address will (normally) accept the frame; network interfaces with non-matching MAC-addresses ignore the frame unless they are inpromiscuous mode.
If the least significant bit of the first octet is set to 1 (i.e. the second hexadecimal digit is odd) the frame will still be sent only once; however, network interface controllers will choose to accept or ignore it based on criteria other than the matching of their individual MAC addresses: for example, based on a configurable list of accepted multicast MAC addresses. This is calledmulticastaddressing.
The IEEE has built in several special address types to allow more than onenetwork interface cardto be addressed at one time:
These are all examples ofgroup addresses, as opposed toindividual addresses; the least significant bit of the first octet of a MAC address distinguishes individual addresses from group addresses. That bit is set to 0 in individual addresses and set to 1 in group addresses. Group addresses, like individual addresses, can be universally administered or locally administered.
The U/L and I/G bits are handled independently, and there areinstancesof all four possibilities.IPv6 multicastuses locally administered, multicast MAC addresses in the range33-33-XX-XX-XX-XX(with both bits set).
Given the locations of the U/L and I/G bits, they can be discerned in a single digit in common MAC address notation as shown in the following table:
IEEE standard 802cfurther divides the locally administered MAC address block into four quadrants.  This additional partitioning is called Structured Local Address Plan (SLAP) and its usage is optional.
The following network technologies use the EUI-48 identifier format:
Every device that connects to an IEEE 802 network (such as Ethernet and Wi-Fi) has an EUI-48 address. Common networked consumer devices such as PCs, smartphones and tablet computers use EUI-48 addresses.
EUI-64 identifiers are used in:
On broadcast networks, such as Ethernet, the MAC address is expected to uniquely identify eachnodeon that segment and allows frames to be marked for specific hosts. It thus forms the basis of most of thelink layer(OSIlayer 2) networking upon which upper-layer protocols rely to produce complex, functioning networks.
Many network interfaces support changing their MAC address. On mostUnix-like systems, the command utilityifconfigmay be used to remove and add link address aliases. For instance, theactiveifconfig directive may be used onNetBSDto specify which of the attached addresses to activate.Hence, various configuration scripts and utilities permit the randomization of the MAC address at the time of booting or before establishing a network connection.
Changing MAC addresses is necessary innetwork virtualization. InMAC spoofing, this is practiced in exploiting security vulnerabilities of a computer system. Some modern operating systems, such as Apple iOS and Android, especially in mobile devices, are designed to assign a random MAC address to their network interface when scanning for wireless access points to avert tracking systems.
InInternet Protocol(IP) networks, the MAC address of an interface corresponding to anIP addressmay be queried with theAddress Resolution Protocol(ARP) forIPv4and theNeighbor Discovery Protocol(NDP) for IPv6. Thus ARP and NDP relate OSIlayer 3addresses to layer 2 addresses.
According toEdward Snowden, the USNational Security Agencyhas a system that tracks the movements of mobile devices in a city by monitoring MAC addresses.To avert this practice,Applestarted using random MAC addresses iniOSdevices while scanning for networks.Other vendors quickly followed suit. MAC address randomization during scanning was added in Android starting from version 6.0,in Windows 10,and in Linux 3.18.The actual implementations of the MAC address randomization technique vary largely in different devices.Moreover, various flaws and shortcomings in these implementations may allow an attacker to track a device even if its MAC address is changed, for instance its probe requests' other elements,or their timing.If random MAC addresses are not used, researchers have confirmed that it is possible to link a real identity to a particular wireless MAC address.
Randomized MAC addresses can be identified by the "locally administered" bit described above.
Usingwireless access pointsinSSID-hidden mode (network cloaking), a mobile wireless device may not only disclose its own MAC address when traveling, but even the MAC addresses associated to SSIDs the device has already connected to, if they are configured to send these as part of probe request packets. Alternative modes to prevent this include configuring access points to be either in beacon-broadcasting mode or probe-response with SSID mode. In these modes, probe requests may be unnecessary or sent in broadcast mode without disclosing the identity of previously known networks.
The standard (IEEE 802) format for printing EUI-48 addresses in human-friendly form is six groups of twohexadecimaldigits, separated by hyphens (-) in transmission order (e.g.01-23-45-67-89-AB). This form is also commonly used for EUI-64 (e.g.01-23-45-67-89-AB-CD-EF).Other conventions include six groups of two hexadecimal digits separated by colons (:) (e.g.01:23:45:67:89:AB), and three groups of four hexadecimal digits separated by dots (.) (e.g.0123.4567.89AB); again in transmission order.
The standard notation, also called canonical format, for MAC addresses is written in transmission order with theleast significant bit of each bytetransmitted first, and is used in the output of theifconfig,ip address, andipconfigcommands, for example.
However, sinceIEEE 802.3(Ethernet) andIEEE 802.4(Token Bus) send the bytes (octets) over the wire, left-to-right, with the least significant bit in each byte first, whileIEEE 802.5(Token Ring) andIEEE 802.6(FDDI) send the bytes over the wire with the most significant bit first, confusion may arise when an address in the latter scenario is represented with bits reversed from the canonical representation. For example, an address in canonical form12-34-56-78-9A-BCwould be transmitted over the wire as bits01001000 00101100 01101010 00011110 01011001 00111101in the standard transmission order (least significant bit first). But for Token Ring networks, it would be transmitted as bits00010010 00110100 01010110 01111000 10011010 10111100in most-significant-bit first order. The latter might be incorrectly displayed as48-2C-6A-1E-59-3D. This is referred to asbit-reversed order,non-canonical form,MSB format,IBM format, orToken Ring format.