Intelecommunications, aprotocol data unit(PDU) is a single unit of information transmitted among peer entities of acomputer network. It is composed of protocol-specific control information anduser data. In the layered architectures ofcommunication protocolstacks, each layer implements protocols tailored to the specific type or mode of data exchange.
For example, theTransmission Control Protocol(TCP) implements a connection-oriented transfer mode, and the PDU of this protocol is called asegment, while theUser Datagram Protocol(UDP) usesdatagramsas protocol data units forconnectionless communication. A layer lower in theInternet protocol suite, at theInternet layer, the PDU is called apacket, irrespective of its payload type.
In the context ofpacket switchingdata networks, a protocol data unit (PDU) is best understood in relation to aservice data unit(SDU).
The features or services of the network are implemented in distinctlayers. The physical layer sends ones and zeros across a wire or fiber. The data link layer then organizes these ones and zeros into chunks of data and gets them safely to the right place on the wire. The network layer transmits the organized data over multiple connected networks, and the transport layer delivers the data to the right software application at the destination.
Between the layers (and between the application and the top-most layer), the layers pass service data units (SDUs) across interfaces.  The higher layer understands the structure of the data in the SDU, but the lower layer at the interface does not; moreover, the lower layer treats the SDU as thepayload, undertaking to get it to the same interface at the destination.  In order to do this, theprotocol(lower) layer will add to the SDU certain data it needs to perform its function; which is calledencapsulation.  For example, it might add a port number to identify the application, a network address to help with routing, a code to identify the type of data in the packet and error-checking information.  All this additional information, plus the original service data unit from the higher layer, constitutes theprotocol data unitat this layer.
The SDU and metadata added by the lower layer can be larger than the maximum size of that layer's PDU (known as themaximum transmission unit; MTU). When this is the case, the PDU must be split into multiple payloads of a size suitable for transmission or processing by the lower layer; a process known asIP fragmentation.
The significance of this is that the PDU is the structured information that is passed to a matching protocol layer further along on the data's journey that allows the layer to deliver its intended function or service.  The matching layer, or "peer", decodes the data to extract the original service data unit, decide if it is error-free and where to send it next, etc.  Unless we have already arrived at the lowest (physical) layer, the PDU is passed to the peer using services of the next lower layer in the protocol "stack".  When the PDU passes over the interface from the layer that constructed it to the layer that merely delivers it (and therefore does not understand its internal structure), it becomes a service data unit to that layer.  The addition of addressing and control information (encapsulation) to an SDU to form a PDU and the passing of that PDU to the next lower layer as an SDU repeats until the lowest layer is reached and the data passes over some medium as a physical signal.
The above process can be likened to the mail system in which a letter (SDU) is placed in an envelope on which is written an address (addressing and control information) making it a PDU.  The sending post office might look only at the postcode and place the letter in a mailbag so that the address on the envelope can no longer be seen, making it now an SDU.  The mailbag is labeled with the destination postcode and so becomes a PDU until it is combined with other bags in a crate when it is now an SDU, and the crate is labeled with the region to which all the bags are to be sent, making the crate a PDU.  When the crate reaches the destination matching its label, it is opened and the bags (SDUs) removed only to become PDUs when someone reads the code of the destination post office.  The letters themselves are SDUs when the bags are opened but become PDUs when the address is read for final delivery.  When the addressee finally opens the envelope, the top-level SDU, the letter itself, emerges.
Protocol data units of theOSI modelare:
Given a context pertaining to a specific OSI layer,PDUis sometimes used as a synonym for its representation at that layer.
Protocol data units for theInternet protocol suiteare:
On TCP/IP over Ethernet, the data on the physical layer is carried inEthernet frames.
The data link layer PDU inAsynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM) networks is called acell.
Amedia access control protocol data unit(MAC PDUorMPDU) is a message that is exchanged betweenmedia access control(MAC) entities in a communication system based on the layered OSI model.
In systems where the MPDU may be larger than the MAC service data unit (MSDU), the MPDU mayincludemultiple MSDUs as a result ofpacket aggregation. In systems where the MPDU is smaller than the MSDU, then one MSDU maygeneratemultiple MPDUs as a result ofpacket segmentation.