Early research and development:
Merging the networks and creating the Internet:
Commercialization, privatization, broader access leads to the modern Internet:
Examples of Internet services:
TheInternet Protocol(IP) is thenetwork layercommunications protocolin theInternet protocol suitefor relayingdatagramsacross network boundaries. Itsroutingfunction enablesinternetworking, and essentially establishes theInternet.
IP has the task of deliveringpacketsfrom the sourcehostto the destination host solely based on theIP addressesin the packetheaders. For this purpose, IP defines packet structures thatencapsulatethe data to be delivered. It also defines addressing methods that are used to label the datagram with source and destination information.
IP was theconnectionlessdatagram service in the originalTransmission Control Programintroduced byVint CerfandBob Kahnin 1974, which was complemented by aconnection-orientedservice that became the basis for theTransmission Control Protocol(TCP). The Internet protocol suite is therefore often referred to asTCP/IP.
The first major version of IP,Internet Protocol version 4(IPv4), is the dominant protocol of the Internet. Its successor isInternet Protocol version 6(IPv6), which has been in increasingdeploymenton the public Internet since around 2006.
The Internet Protocol is responsible for addressinghost interfaces, encapsulating data into datagrams (includingfragmentation and reassembly) and routing datagrams from a source host interface to a destination host interface across one or more IP networks.For these purposes, the Internet Protocol defines the format of packets and provides an addressing system.
Each datagram has two components: aheaderand apayload. TheIP headerincludes a source IP address, a destination IP address, and other metadata needed to route and deliver the datagram. The payload is the data that is transported. This method of nesting the data payload in a packet with a header is called encapsulation.
IP addressing entails the assignment of IP addresses and associated parameters to host interfaces. The address space is divided intosubnets, involving the designation of network prefixes. IP routing is performed by all hosts, as well asrouters, whose main function is to transport packets across network boundaries. Routers communicate with one another via specially designedrouting protocols, eitherinterior gateway protocolsorexterior gateway protocols, as needed for the topology of the network.
There are four principal addressing methods in the Internet Protocol:
In May 1974, theInstitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers(IEEE) published a paper entitled "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication".The paper's authors,Vint CerfandBob Kahn, described aninternetworkingprotocol for sharing resources usingpacket switchingamongnetwork nodes. A central control component of this model was the Transmission Control Program that incorporated both connection-oriented links and datagram services between hosts. The monolithic Transmission Control Program was later divided into a modular architecture consisting of theTransmission Control ProtocolandUser Datagram Protocolat thetransport layerand the Internet Protocol at theinternet layer. The model became known as theDepartment of Defense (DoD) Internet ModelandInternet protocol suite, and informally asTCP/IP.
The followingInternet Experiment Note(IEN) documents describe the evolution of the Internet Protocol into the modern version of IPv4:
IP versions 1 to 3 were experimental versions, designed between 1973 and 1978.Versions 2 and 3 supported variable-length addresses ranging between 1 and 16 octets (between 8 and 128 bits).An early draft of version 4 supported variable-length addresses of up to 256 octets (up to 2048 bits)but this was later abandoned in favor of a fixed-size 32-bit address in the final version ofIPv4. This remains the dominant internetworking protocol in use in theInternet Layer; the number 4 identifies the protocol version, carried in every IP datagram. IPv4 is defined inRFC791(1981).
Version number 5 was used by theInternet Stream Protocol, an experimental streaming protocol that was not adopted.
The successor to IPv4 isIPv6. IPv6 was a result of several years of experimentation and dialog during which various protocol models were proposed, such as TP/IX (RFC1475), PIP (RFC1621) and TUBA (TCP and UDP with Bigger Addresses,RFC1347). Its most prominent difference from version 4 is the size of the addresses. While IPv4 uses32 bitsfor addressing, yielding c. 4.3billion(4.3×10) addresses, IPv6 uses128-bitaddresses providing c.3.4×10addresses. Although adoption of IPv6 has been slow, as of January 2023, most countries in the world show significant adoption of IPv6,with over 41% of Google's traffic being carried over IPv6 connections.
The assignment of the new protocol as IPv6 was uncertain until due diligence assured that IPv6 had not been used previously.Other Internet Layer protocols have been assigned version numbers,such as 7 (IP/TX), 8 and 9 (historic). Notably, on April 1, 1994, theIETFpublished anApril Fools' Day RfCabout IPv9.IPv9 was also used in an alternate proposed address space expansion called TUBA.A 2004 Chinese proposal foran IPv9 protocolappears to be unrelated to all of these, and is not endorsed by the IETF.
The design of the Internet protocol suite adheres to theend-to-end principle, a concept adapted from theCYCLADESproject. Under the end-to-end principle, the network infrastructure is considered inherently unreliable at any single network element or transmission medium and is dynamic in terms of the availability of links and nodes. No central monitoring or performance measurement facility exists that tracks or maintains the state of the network. For the benefit of reducingnetwork complexity, the intelligence in the network is located in theend nodes.
As a consequence of this design, the Internet Protocol only providesbest-effort deliveryand its service is characterized asunreliable. In network architectural parlance, it is aconnectionless protocol, in contrast toconnection-oriented communication. Various fault conditions may occur, such asdata corruption,packet lossand duplication. Because routing is dynamic, meaning every packet is treated independently, and because the network maintains no state based on the path of prior packets, different packets may be routed to the same destination via different paths, resulting inout-of-order deliveryto the receiver.
All fault conditions in the network must be detected and compensated by the participating end nodes. Theupper layer protocolsof the Internet protocol suite are responsible for resolving reliability issues. For example, a host maybuffernetwork data to ensure correct ordering before the data is delivered to an application.
IPv4 provides safeguards to ensure that the header of an IP packet is error-free. A routing node discards packets that fail a headerchecksumtest. Although theInternet Control Message Protocol(ICMP) provides notification of errors, a routing node is not required to notify either end node of errors. IPv6, by contrast, operates without header checksums, since currentlink layertechnology is assumed to provide sufficient error detection.
The dynamic nature of the Internet and the diversity of its components provide no guarantee that any particular path is actually capable of, or suitable for, performing the data transmission requested. One of the technical constraints is the size of data packets possible on a given link. Facilities exist to examine themaximum transmission unit(MTU) size of the local link andPath MTU Discoverycan be used for the entire intended path to the destination.
The IPv4 internetworking layer automaticallyfragmentsa datagram into smaller units for transmission when the link MTU is exceeded. IP provides re-ordering of fragments received out of order.An IPv6 network does not perform fragmentation in network elements, but requires end hosts and higher-layer protocols to avoid exceeding the path MTU.
TheTransmission Control Protocol(TCP) is an example of a protocol that adjusts its segment size to be smaller than the MTU. TheUser Datagram Protocol(UDP) and ICMP disregard MTU size, thereby forcing IP to fragment oversized datagrams.
During the design phase of theARPANETand the early Internet, the security aspects and needs of a public, international network could not be adequately anticipated.  Consequently, many Internet protocols exhibited vulnerabilities highlighted by network attacks and later security assessments. In 2008, a thorough security assessment and proposed mitigation of problems was published.The IETF has been pursuing further studies.