Classless Inter-Domain Routing(CIDR/ˈsaɪdər,ˈsɪ-/) is a method for allocatingIP addressesforIP routing. TheInternet Engineering Task Forceintroduced CIDR in 1993 to replace the previousclassful networkaddressing architecture on theInternet. Its goal was to slow the growth ofrouting tablesonroutersacross the Internet, and to help slow the rapidexhaustion of IPv4 addresses.
IP addresses are described as consisting of two groups ofbitsin the address: themost significant bitsare thenetwork prefix, which identifies a whole network orsubnet, and theleast significantset forms thehost identifier, which specifies a particular interface of a host on that network. This division is used as the basis of traffic routing between IP networks and for address allocation policies.
Whereas classful network design forIPv4sized the network prefix as one or more 8-bit groups, resulting in the blocks of Class A, B, or C addresses, under CIDR address space is allocated toInternet service providersandend userson any address-bit boundary. InIPv6, however, the interface identifier has a fixed size of 64 bits by convention, and smaller subnets are never allocated to end users.
CIDR is based onvariable-length subnet masking(VLSM), in which network prefixes have variable length (as opposed to the fixed-length prefixing of the previous classful network design). The main benefit of this is that it grants finer control of the sizes of subnets allocated to organizations, hence slowing the exhaustion of IPv4 addresses from allocating larger subnets than needed. CIDR gave rise to a new way of writing IP addresses known as CIDR notation, in which an IP address is followed by a suffix indicating the number of bits of the prefix. Some examples of CIDR notation are the addresses192.0.2.0/24for IPv4 and2001:db8::/32for IPv6. Blocks of addresses having contiguous prefixes may be aggregated assupernets, reducing the number of entries in the global routing table.
Each IP address consists of a network prefix followed by ahostidentifier. In theclassful networkarchitecture ofIPv4, the three most significant bits of the 32-bit IP address defined the size of the network prefix for unicast networking, and determined the network class A, B, or C.
The advantage of this system is that the network prefix could be determined for any IP address without any further information. The disadvantage is that networks were usually too big or too small for most organizations to use, because only three sizes were available. The smallest allocation and routing block contained 2= 256 addresses, larger than necessary for personal or department networks, but too small for most enterprises. The next larger block contained 2=65536addresses, too large to be used efficiently even by large organizations. But for network users who needed more than65536addresses, the only other size (2) provided far too many, more than 16 million. This led to inefficiencies in address use as well as inefficiencies in routing, because it required a large number of allocated class-C networks with individual route announcements, being geographically dispersed with little opportunity forroute aggregation.
Within a decade after the invention of theDomain Name System(DNS), the classful network method was found notscalable.This led to the development ofsubnettingand CIDR. The formerly meaningful class distinctions based on the most-significant address bits were abandoned and the new system was described asclassless, in contrast to the old system, which became known asclassful. Routing protocols were revised to carry not just IP addresses, but also their subnet masks. Implementing CIDR required every host and router on the Internet to be reprogrammed in small ways—no small feat at a time when the Internet was entering a period of rapid growth. In 1993, theInternet Engineering Task Forcepublished a new set of standards,RFC1518andRFC1519, to define this new principle for allocating IP address blocks and routing IPv4 packets. An updated version,RFC4632, was published in 2006.
After a period of experimentation with various alternatives, Classless Inter-Domain Routing was based on variable-length subnet masking (VLSM), which allows each network to be divided into subnetworks of various power-of-two sizes, so that each subnetwork can be sized appropriately for local needs. Variable-length subnet masks were mentioned as one alternative inRFC950.Techniques for grouping addresses for common operations were based on the concept of cluster addressing, first proposed by Carl-Herbert Rokitansky.
CIDR notationis a compact representation of an IP address and its associated network mask. The notation was invented byPhil Karnin the 1980s.CIDR notation specifies an IP address, aslash('/') character, and a decimal number. The decimal number is the count of consecutive leading1-bits (from left to right) in the network mask. Each 1-bit denotes a bit of the address range which must remain identical to the given IP address. The IP address in CIDR notation is always represented according to the standards for IPv4 or IPv6.
The address may denote a specific interface address (including a host identifier, such as10.0.0.1/8), or it may be the beginning address of an entire network (using a host identifier of 0, as in10.0.0.0/8or its equivalent10/8). CIDR notation can even be used with no IP address at all, e.g. when referring to a/24as a generic description of an IPv4 network that has a 24-bit prefix and 8-bit host numbers.
For example:
In IPv4, CIDR notation came into wide use only after the implementation of the method, which was documented usingdotted-decimalsubnet mask specification after the slash, for example,192.24.12.0/255.255.252.0.Describing the network prefix width as a single number (192.24.12.0/22) was easier for network administrators to conceptualize and to calculate. It became gradually incorporated into later standards documentsand into network configuration interfaces.
The number of addresses of a network may be calculated as 2, whereaddress lengthis 128 for IPv6 and 32 for IPv4. For example, in IPv4, the prefix length/29gives: 2= 2= 8 addresses.
A subnet mask is abitmaskthat encodes the prefix length associated with an IPv4 address or network in quad-dotted notation: 32 bits, starting with a number of1-bits equal to the prefix length, ending with0-bits, and encoded in four-part dotted-decimal format:255.255.255.0. A subnet mask encodes the same information as a prefix length but predates the advent of CIDR. In CIDR notation, the prefix bits are always contiguous. Subnet masks were allowed byRFC950to specify non-contiguous bits untilRFC4632stated that the mask must be left contiguous. Given this constraint, a subnet mask and CIDR notation serve exactly the same function.
CIDR is principally a bitwise, prefix-based standard for the representation of IP addresses and their routing properties. It facilitates routing by allowing blocks of addresses to be grouped into single routing table entries. These groups, commonly called CIDR blocks, share an initial sequence of bits in the binary representation of their IP addresses. IPv4 CIDR blocks are identified using a syntax similar to that of IPv4 addresses: a dotted-decimal address, followed by a slash, then a number from 0 to 32, i.e.,a.b.c.d/n. The dotted decimal portion is the IPv4 address. The number following the slash is the prefix length, the number of shared initial bits, counting from the most-significant bit of the address. When emphasizing only the size of a network, the address portion of the notation is usually omitted. Thus, a /20 block is a CIDR block with an unspecified 20-bit prefix.
An IP address is part of a CIDR block and is said to match the CIDR prefix if the initialnbits of the address and the CIDR prefix are the same. An IPv4 address is 32 bits so ann-bit CIDR prefix leaves 32 −nbits unmatched, meaning that 2IPv4 addresses match a givenn-bit CIDR prefix. Shorter CIDR prefixes match more addresses, while longer prefixes match fewer. In the case of overlaid CIDR blocks, an address can match multiple CIDR prefixes of different lengths.
CIDR is also used forIPv6 addressesand the syntax semantic is identical. The prefix length can range from 0 to 128, due to the larger number of bits in the address. However, by convention, a subnet on broadcast MAC layer networks always has 64-bit host identifiers.Larger prefixes (/127) are only used on some point-to-point links between routers, for security and policy reasons.
TheInternet Assigned Numbers Authority(IANA) issues toregional Internet registries(RIRs) large, short-prefix CIDR blocks. However, a/8(with over sixteen million addresses) is the largest block IANA will allocate. For example,62.0.0.0/8is administered byRIPE NCC, the European RIR. The RIRs, each responsible for a single, large, geographic area, such as Europe or North America, subdivide these blocks and allocate subnets to local Internet registries (LIRs). Similar subdividing may be repeated several times at lower levels of delegation. End-user networks receive subnets sized according to their projected short-term need. Networks served by a single ISP are encouraged byIETFrecommendations to obtain IP address space directly from their ISP. Networks served by multiple ISPs, on the other hand, may obtainprovider-independent address spacedirectly from the appropriate RIR.
For example, in the late 1990s, the IP address208.130.29.33(since reassigned) was used by www.freesoft.org. An analysis of this address identified three CIDR prefixes.208.128.0.0/11, a large CIDR block containing over 2 million addresses, had been assigned byARIN(the North American RIR) toMCI. Automation Research Systems (ARS), a VirginiaVAR, leased an Internet connection from MCI and was assigned the208.130.28.0/22block, capable of addressing just over 1000 devices. ARS used a/24block for its publicly accessible servers, of which208.130.29.33was one. All of these CIDR prefixes would be used, at different locations in the network. Outside MCI's network, the208.128.0.0/11prefix would be used to direct to MCI traffic bound not only for208.130.29.33, but also for any of the roughly two million IP addresses with the same initial 11 bits. Within MCI's network,208.130.28.0/22would become visible, directing traffic to the leased line serving ARS. Only within the ARS corporate network would the208.130.29.0/24prefix have been used.
In common usage, the first address in a subnet, all binary zero in the host identifier, is reserved for referring to the network itself, while the last address, all binary one in the host identifier, is used as abroadcast addressfor the network; this reduces the number of addresses available for hosts by 2. As a result, a/31network, with one binary digit in the host identifier, would be unusable, as such a subnet would provide no available host addresses after this reduction.RFC3021creates an exception to the "host all ones" and "host all zeros" rules to make/31networks usable for point-to-point links./32addresses (single-host network) must be accessed by explicit routing rules, as there is no room in such a network for a gateway.
In routed subnets larger than/31or/32, the number of available host addresses is usually reduced by two, namely the largest address, which is reserved as the broadcast address, and the smallest address, which identifies the network itself.
The large address size of IPv6 permitted worldwide route summarization and guaranteed sufficient address pools at each site. The standard subnet size for IPv6 networks is a/64block, which is required for the operation ofstateless address autoconfiguration.At first, the IETF recommended inRFC3177as a best practice that all end sites receive a/48address allocation,but criticism and reevaluation of actual needs and practices has led to more flexible allocation recommendations inRFC6177suggesting a significantly smaller allocation for some sites, such as a/56block for residential networks.
ThisIPv6 subnetting referencelists the sizes for IPv6subnetworks. Different types of network links may require different subnet sizes.The subnet mask separates the bits of the network identifier prefix from the bits of the interface identifier. Selecting a smaller prefix size results in fewer number of networks covered, but with more addresses within each network.
Topologically, the set of subnets described by CIDR represent acoverof the corresponding address space.  The interval described by the notationX/n{\displaystyle X/n}numerically corresponds to addresses of the form (for IPv4)[x⋅232−n,x⋅232−n+232−n−1]{\displaystyle [x\cdot 2^{32-n},x\cdot 2^{32-n}+2^{32-n}-1]}, whereX=x⋅232−n{\displaystyle X=x\cdot 2^{32-n}}has the lowern{\displaystyle n}bits set to 0.  (For IPv6, substitute 128.)  For a fixedn{\displaystyle n}, the set of allX/n{\displaystyle X/n}subnets constitute apartition, that is a cover of non-overlapping sets.  Increasingn{\displaystyle n}yields finer and finer subpartitions.  Thus two subnetsX/n{\displaystyle X/n}andY/m{\displaystyle Y/m}are either disjoint or one is a subnet of the other.
CIDR provides fine-grainedrouting prefix aggregation. For example, if the first 20 bits of their network prefixes match, sixteen contiguous/24networks can be aggregated and advertised to a larger network as a single/20routing tableentry. This reduces the number of routes that have to be advertised.