Intelecommunications, acustomer-premises equipmentorcustomer-provided equipment(CPE) is anyterminaland associated equipment located at asubscriber'spremises and connected with acarrier'stelecommunication circuitat thedemarcation point("demarc"). The demarc is a point established in a building or complex to separate customer equipment from the equipment located in either the distribution infrastructure orcentral officeof thecommunications service provider.
CPE generally refers to devices such as telephones,routers,network switches,residential gateways(RG),set-top boxes,fixed mobile convergenceproducts,home networkingadapters and Internet accessgatewaysthat enable consumers to access providers' communication services and distribute them in a residence or enterprise with alocal area network(LAN).
A CPE can be an active equipment, as the ones mentioned above, or passive equipment such asanalog telephone adapters(ATA) orxDSL-splitters. This includeskey telephone systemsand mostprivate branch exchanges. Excluded from the CPE category areovervoltageprotection equipment andpay telephones. Other types of materials that are necessary for the delivery of the telecommunication service, but are not defined as equipment, such as manuals and cable packages, and cable adapters are instead referred to as CPE-peripherals.
CPE can refer to devices purchased by the subscriber, or to those provided by the operator or service provider.
The two phrases, "customer-premisesequipment" and "customer-providedequipment", reflect the history of this equipment.
Under theBell Systemmonopoly in the United States (postCommunications Act of 1934), the Bell System owned the telephones, and one could not attach privately owned or supplied devices to the network, or to the station apparatus. Telephones were located on customers' premises, hence, customer-premisesequipment.  In the U.S.Federal Communications Commission(FCC) proceeding theSecond Computer Inquiry, the FCC ruled that telecommunications carriers could no longer bundle CPE with telecommunications service, uncoupling the market power of the telecommunications service monopoly from the CPE market, and creating a competitive CPE market.
With the gradual breakup of the Bell monopoly, starting withHush-A-Phone v. United States[1956], which allowed some non-Bell owned equipment to be connected to the network (a process calledinterconnection), equipment on customers' premises became increasingly owned by customers. Indeed, subscribers were eventually permitted to purchase telephones – hence, customer-providedequipment.
In the pay-TV industry many operators and service providers offer subscribers aset-top boxwith which to receive video services, in return for a monthly fee.  As offerings have evolved to include multiple services [voice and data] operators have increasingly given consumers the opportunity to rent or buy additional devices like accessmodems, internet gateways and video extenders that enable them to access multiple services, and distribute them to a range ofconsumer electronicsdevices in the home.
The growth ofmultiple system operators, offering triple or quad-play services, required the development of hybrid CPE to make it easy for subscribers to access voice, video and data services. The development of this technology was led byPay TVoperators looking for a way to deliver video services via both traditional broadcast and broadband IP networks.  Spain'sTelefonicawas the first operator to launch a hybrid broadcast and broadband TV service in 2003 with its Movistar TVDTT/IPTVoffering,while Polish satellite operator 'n' was the first to offer its subscribers aThree-way hybrid(or Tri-brid) broadcast and broadband TV service,which launched in 2009
The termset-back boxis used in the digital TV industry to describe a piece of consumer hardware that enables them to access both linear broadcast and internet-based video content, plus a range of interactive services likeElectronic Programme Guides(EPG),Pay Per View(PPV) andvideo on demand(VOD) as well as internet browsing, and view them on a large screen television set. Unlike standard set-top boxes, which sit on top of or below theTV, a set-back box has a smaller form factor to enable it to be mounted to the rear of the display panel flat panel TV, hiding it from view.
Aresidential gatewayis a networking device used to connect devices in the home to the Internet or otherwide area network(WAN).
It is an umbrella term, used to cover multi-function networkingappliancesused in homes, which may combine aDSL modemorcable modem, anetwork switch, a consumer-graderouter, and awireless access point. In the past, such functions were provided by separate devices, but in recent yearstechnological convergencehas enabled multiple functions to be merged into a single device.
One of the first home gateway devices to be launched was selected by Telecom Italia to enable the operator to offer triple play services in 2002: Along with a SIP VoIP handset for making voice calls, it enabled subscribers to access voice, video and data services over a 10MB symmetricalADSLfiberconnection.
The virtual gateway concept enables consumers to access video and data services and distribute them around their homes using software rather than hardware.  The first virtual gateway was introduced in 2010 byAdvanced Digital Broadcastat the IBC exhibition in Amsterdam.The ADB Virtual Gateway uses software that resides within the middleware and is based on open standards, includingDLNAhome networking and theDTCP-IPstandard, to ensure that all content, including paid-for encrypted content likePay TVservices, can only be accessed by secure CE devices.
Asubscriber unit, orSUis a broadband radio that is installed at a business or residential location to connect to anaccess pointto send/receive high speed data wired or wirelessly.  Devices commonly referred to as a subscriber unit includecable modems, access gateways, home networking adapters and mobile phones. Example brands and vendors includeSpeedTouch,DrayTek,Ubee Interactive,2WireandEfficient Networks.
CPE may also refer to any devices that terminate aWANcircuit, such as anISDN,E-carrier/T-carrier,DSL, ormetro Ethernet. This includes any customer-owned hardware at the customer's site:routers,firewalls,network switches,PBXs,VoIPgateways, sometimesCSU/DSUandmodems.
Application areas