Systems Network Architecture(SNA) isIBM's proprietarynetworkingarchitecture, created in 1974.It is a completeprotocol stackfor interconnectingcomputersand their resources. SNA describes formats and protocols but, in itself, is not a piece of software. The implementation of SNA takes the form of various communications packages, most notablyVirtual Telecommunications Access Method(VTAM), themainframesoftware package for SNA communications.
SNA was made public as part of IBM's "Advanced Function for Communications" announcement in September, 1974,which included the implementation of the SNA/SDLC (Synchronous Data Link Control) protocols on new communications products:
They were supported byIBM 3704/3705communication controllers and theirNetwork Control Program(NCP), and by System/370 and their VTAM and other software such as CICS and IMS. This announcement was followed by another announcement in July, 1975, which introduced theIBM 3760data entry station, theIBM 3790communication system, and the new models of theIBM 3270display system.
SNA was designed in the era when the computer industry had not fully adopted the concept of layered communication. Applications, databases, and communication functions were mingled into the same protocol or product, which made it difficult to maintain and manage.SNA was mainly designed by the IBM Systems Development Division laboratory inResearch Triangle Park,North Carolina, USA,helped by other laboratories that implemented SNA/SDLC. IBM later made the details public in its System Reference Library manuals andIBM Systems Journal.
It is still used extensively in banks and other financial transaction networks, as well as in many government agencies. In 1999 there were an estimated 3,500 companies "with 11,000 SNA mainframes."One of the primary pieces of hardware, the3745/3746 communications controller, has been withdrawnfrom the market by IBM. IBM continues to provide hardware maintenance service and microcode features to support users. A robust market of smaller companies continues to provide the 3745/3746, features, parts, and service. VTAM is also supported by IBM, as is the NCP required by the 3745/3746 controllers.
In 2008 an IBM publication said:
with the popularity and growth of TCP/IP, SNA is changing from being a true network architecture to being what could be termed an "application and application access architecture." In other words, there are many applications that still need to communicate in SNA, but the required SNA protocols are carried over the network by IP.
IBM in the mid-1970s saw itself mainly as a hardware vendor and hence all its innovations in that period aimed to increase hardware sales. SNA's objective was to reduce the costs of operating large numbers of terminals and thus induce customers to develop or expandinteractiveterminal-based systems as opposed tobatchsystems. An expansion of interactive terminal-based systems would increase sales of terminals and more importantly of mainframe computers and peripherals - partly because of the simple increase in the volume of work done by the systems and partly because interactive processing requires more computing power per transaction than batch processing.
Hence SNA aimed to reduce the main non-computer costs and other difficulties in operating large networks using earlier communications protocols. The difficulties included:
As a result, running a large number of terminals required a lot more communications lines than the number required today, especially if different types of terminals needed to be supported, or the users wanted to use different types of applications (.e.g. under CICS or TSO) from the same location. In purely financial terms SNA's objectives were to increase customers' spending on terminal-based systems and at the same time to increase IBM's share of that spending, mainly at the expense of the telecommunications companies.
SNA also aimed to overcome a limitation of the architecture which IBM'sSystem/370mainframes inherited fromSystem/360. Each CPU could connect to at most 16I/O channelsand each channel could handle up to 256 peripherals - i.e. there was a maximum of 4096 peripherals per CPU. At the time when SNA was designed, each communications line counted as a peripheral. Thus the number of terminals with which powerful mainframes could otherwise communicate was limited.
Improvements in computer component technology made it feasible to build terminals that included more powerful communications cards which could operate a single standardcommunications protocolrather than a very stripped-down protocol which suited only a specific type of terminal. As a result, severalmulti-layer communications protocolswere proposed in the 1970s, of which IBM's SNA andITU-T'sX.25became dominant later.
The most important elements of SNA include:
SNA removed link control from the application program and placed it in the NCP. This had the following advantages and disadvantages:
SNA at its core was designed with the ability to wrap different layers of connections with a blanket of security. To communicate within an SNA environment you would first have to connect to a node and establish and maintain a link connection into the network. You then have to negotiate a proper session and then handle the flows within the session itself. At each level there are different security controls that can govern the connections and protect the session information.
Network Addressable Unitsin a SNA network are any components that can be assigned an address and can send and receive information. They are distinguished further as follows:
SNA essentially offers transparent communication: equipment specifics that do not impose any constraints onto LU-LU communication. But eventually it serves a purpose to make a distinction between LU types, as the application must take the functionality of the terminal equipment into account (e.g. screen sizes and layout).
Within SNA there are three types of data stream to connect local display terminals and printers; there is SNA Character String (SCS), used for LU1 terminals and for logging on to an SNA network with Unformatted System Services (USS), there is the3270data streammainly used by mainframes such as theSystem/370and successors, including thezSeriesfamily, and the5250data stream mainly used by minicomputers/servers such as theSystem/34,System/36,System/38, andAS/400and its successors, including System i andIBM Power SystemsrunningIBM i.
SNA defines several kinds of devices, called Logical Unit types:
The primary ones in use are LU1, LU2, andLU6.2(an advanced protocol for application to application conversations).
The term37xxrefers to IBM's family of SNA communications controllers. The 3745 supports up to eight high-speedT1circuits, the 3725 is a large-scale node andfront-end processorfor a host, and the3720is a remote node that functions as aconcentratorandrouter.
VTAM/NCP PU4 nodes attached to IBMToken Ringnetworks can share the same Local Area Network infrastructure with workstations and servers. NCP encapsulates SNA packets into Token-Ring frames, allowing sessions to flow over a Token-Ring network. The actual encapsulation and decapsulation takes place in the 3745.
As mainframe-based entities looked for alternatives to their 37XX-based networks, IBM partnered withCiscoin the mid-1990s and together they developedData Link Switching, or DLSw. DLSw encapsulates SNA packets into IP datagrams, allowing sessions to flow over an IP network. The actual encapsulation and decapsulation takes place in Cisco routers at each end of a DLSw peer connection. At the local, or mainframe site, the router uses Token Ring topology to connect natively to VTAM. At the remote (user) end of the connection, a PU type 2 emulator (such as an SNA gateway server) connects to the peer router via the router's LAN interface. End user terminals are typically PCs with 3270 emulation software that is defined to the SNA gateway. The VTAM/NCP PU type 2 definition becomes a Switched Major Node that can be local to VTAM (without an NCP), and a "Line" connection can be defined using various possible solutions (such as a Token Ring interface on the 3745, a 3172 Lan Channel Station, or a CiscoESCON-compatible Channel Interface Processor).
The proprietary networking architecture forHoneywell Bullmainframes isDistributed Systems Architecture(DSA).The Communications package for DSA isVIP. DSA is also no longer supported for client access. Bull mainframes are fitted withMainwayfor translating DSA toTCP/IPand VIP devices are replaced by TNVIPTerminal Emulations(GLink,Winsurf).GCOS 8supportsTNVIP SEover TCP/IP.
The networking architecture forUnivacmainframes was the Distributed Computing Architecture (DCA), and the networking architecture forBurroughsmainframes was the Burroughs Network Architecture (BNA); after they merged to formUnisys, both were provided by the merged company. Both were largely obsolete by 2012.International Computers Limited(ICL) provided its Information Processing Architecture (IPA).
DECnetis a suite ofnetwork protocolscreated byDigital Equipment Corporation, originally released in 1975 to connect twoPDP-11minicomputers. It evolved into one of the firstpeer-to-peernetwork architectures, thus transforming DEC into a networking powerhouse in the 1980s.
SNA also competed withISO'sOpen Systems Interconnection, which was an attempt to create a vendor-neutral network architecture that failed due to the problems of "design by committee".OSI systems are very complex, and the many parties involved required extensive flexibilities that hurt the interoperability of OSI systems, which was the prime objective to start with.
The TCP/IP suite for many years was not considered a serious alternative by IBM, due in part to the lack of control over the intellectual property.The 1988 publication ofRFC1041, authored byYakov Rekhter, which defines an option to runIBM 3270sessions overTelnet, explicitly recognizes the customer demand for interoperability in the data center. Subsequently, the IETF expanded on this work with multiple other RFCs.TN3270(Telnet 3270), defined by those RFCs, supports direct client-server connections to the mainframe using a TN3270 server on the mainframe, and a TN3270 emulation package on the computer at the end user site. This protocol allows existing VTAM applications (CICS, TSO) to run with little or no change from traditional SNA by supporting traditional 3270 terminal protocol over the TCP/IP session. This protocol is widely used to replace legacy SNA connectivity more thanData-Link Switching(DLSw) and other SNA replacement technologies. A similarTN5250(Telnet 5250) variant exists for theIBM 5250.
Non-IBM SNA software allowed systems other than IBM's to communicate with IBM's mainframes andAS/400midrange computers using the SNA protocols.
Some Unix system vendors, such asSun Microsystemswith its SunLink SNA product line, including PU2.1 Server,andHewlett-Packard/Hewlett Packard Enterprise, with their SNAplus2 product,provided SNA software.
Microsoftintroduced SNA Server forWindowsin 1993;it is now namedMicrosoft Host Integration Server.
Digital Equipment Corporationhad VMS/SNA forVMS.Third-party SNA software packages for VMS, such as the VAX Link products from Systems Strategies, Inc.,were also available.
Hewlett-Packard offered SNA Server and SNA Access for itsHP 3000systems.
Brixton Systems developed several SNA software packages, sold under the name "Brixton",such as Brixton BrxPU21, BrxPU5, BrxLU62, and BrxAPPC, for systems such as workstations fromHewlett-Packard,andSun Microsystems.
IBM supported using several non-IBM software implementations ofAPPC/PU2.1/LU6.2to communicate withz/OS, including SNAplus2 for systems fromHP,Brixton 4.1 SNA forSun Solaris,and SunLink SNA 9.1 Support for Sun Solaris.