In theIEEE 802reference model ofcomputer networking, thelogical link control(LLC)data communication protocollayer is the upper sublayer of thedata link layer(layer 2) of the seven-layerOSI model. The LLC sublayer acts as an interface between themedium access control(MAC) sublayer and thenetwork layer.
The LLC sublayer providesmultiplexingmechanisms that make it possible for several network protocols (e.g.IP,IPXandDECnet) to coexist within a multipoint network and to be transported over the same network medium. It can also provideflow controlandautomatic repeat request(ARQ) error management mechanisms.
The LLC sublayer is primarily concerned withmultiplexingprotocols transmitted over the MAC layer (when transmitting) and demultiplexing them (when receiving).
It can also provide node-to-node flow control and error management.
The flow control and error management capabilities of the LLC sublayer are used by protocols such as theNetBIOS Framesprotocol. However, most protocol stacks running atop802.2do not use LLC sublayer flow control and error management. In these cases flow control and error management are taken care of by atransport layerprotocol such asTCPor by someapplication layerprotocol. These higher layer protocols work in an end-to-end fashion, i.e. re-transmission is done from the original source to the final destination, rather than on individual physical segments. For these protocol stacks only the multiplexing capabilities of the LLC sublayer are used.
An LLC sublayer was a key component in early packet switching networks such asX.25networks with theLAPBdata link layer protocol, where flow control and error management were carried out in a node-to-node fashion, meaning that if an error was detected in a frame, the frame was retransmitted from one switch to next instead. This extensive handshaking between the nodes made the networks slow.
TheIEEE 802.2standard specifies the LLC sublayer for allIEEE 802local area networks, such asIEEE 802.3/Ethernet(whenEthernet IIframe format is not used),IEEE 802.5, andIEEE 802.11. IEEE 802.2 is also used in some non-IEEE 802 networks such asFDDI.
Since bit errors are very rare in wired networks, Ethernet does not provide flow control orautomatic repeat request(ARQ), meaning that incorrect packets are detected but only cancelled, not retransmitted (except in case of collisions detected by theCSMA/CDMAC layer protocol). Instead, retransmissions rely on higher-layer protocols.
As theEtherTypein an Ethernet frame usingEthernet II framingis used to multiplex different protocols on top of the Ethernet MAC header it can be seen as an LLC identifier. However, Ethernet frames lacking an EtherType have no LLC identifier in the Ethernet header, and, instead, use an IEEE 802.2 LLC header after the Ethernet header to provide the protocol multiplexing function.
In wireless communications, bit errors are very common. In wireless networks such as IEEE 802.11, flow control and error management is part of theCSMA/CAMAC protocol, and not part of the LLC layer. The LLC sublayer follows theIEEE 802.2standard.
Some non-IEEE 802 protocols can be thought of as being split into MAC and LLC layers. For example, whileHDLCspecifies both MAC functions (framing of packets) and LLC functions (protocol multiplexing, flow control, detection, and error control through retransmission of dropped packets when indicated), some protocols such asCisco HDLCcan use HDLC-like packet framing and their own LLC protocol.
Over telephone networkmodems,PPPlink layer protocols can be considered as a LLC protocol, providing multiplexing, but it does not provide flow control and error management. In a telephone network, bit errors might be common, meaning that error management is crucial, but that is today provided by modern protocols. Today's modem protocols have inherited LLC features from the olderLAPMlink layer protocol, made for modem communication in old X.25 networks.
TheGPRSLLC layer also does ciphering and deciphering of SN-PDU (SNDCP) packets.
Another example of adata link layerwhich is split between LLC (for flow and error control) and MAC (for multiple access) is theITU-TG.hnstandard, which provides high-speed local area networking over existing home wiring (power lines, phone lines and coaxial cables).