Plain old telephone service(POTS), orpublicly offered telephone service,is aretronymforvoice-gradetelephoneservice that employs analog signal transmission over copper loops. The term POTS originally stood forpost office telephone service,as early telephone lines in many regions were operated directly bylocal post offices. For instance, in New Zealand, the telephone system remained under Post Office control until the 1980s.
POTS was the standard service offering from telephone companies in the United States from 1876 until 1988,when theIntegrated Services Digital Network(ISDN) Basic Rate Interface (BRI) was introduced, followed by the development ofcellular telephonesystems andvoice over internet protocol(VoIP).
Despite the advent of these technologies, POTS remains a basic form of residential and small business connection to thetelephone networkin many parts of the world. The term encapsulates a technology that has been available since the introduction of the public telephone system in the late 19th century, remaining largely unchanged despite the introduction of innovations such asTouch-Tonedialing, electronictelephone exchangesandfiber-optic communicationinto thepublic switched telephone network(PSTN).
Modern, automated POTS is characterized by several aspects:
Thepair of wiresfrom the central office switch to a subscriber's home is called asubscriber loop. It carries a direct current (DC)voltageat a nominal voltage of −48V when the receiver is on-hook, supplied by a power conversion system in the central office.  This power conversion system is backed up with a bank of batteries, resulting in continuation of service during interruption of power to the customer supplied by their electrical utility.
The maximum resistance of the loop is 1,700ohms, which translates into a maximum loop length of 18,000 feet or 5 km using standard 24-gauge wire. (Longer loops are often constructed with larger, lower-resistance 19-gauge wire and/or specialized central office equipment called aloop extender. They may be 50,000 feet [15 km] or more.)
Manycalling featuresbecame available to telephone subscribers after computerization of telephone exchanges during the 1980s in the United States. The services includevoicemail,caller ID,call waiting,speed dialing,conference calls(three-way calling),enhanced 911, andCentrexservices.
The communication circuits of thepublic switched telephone networkcontinue to be modernized by advances in digital communications; however, other than improving sound quality, these changes have been mainly transparent to customers. In most cases, the function of thelocal looppresented to the customer for connection to telephone equipment is practically unchanged and remains compatible withpulse dialingtelephones.
Due to the wide availability of traditional telephone services, new types of communications devices, such asmodemsandfax machines, were initially designed to use traditional analog telephony to transmit digital information.
Although POTS provides limited features, lowbandwidth, and nomobilecapabilities, it provides greater reliability than other telephony systems (mobile phone,VoIP, etc.). Many telephone service providers attempt to achieve dial-tone availability more than 99.999% of the time the telephone is takenoff-hook. This is an often cited benchmark in marketing and systems-engineering comparisons, called the "five nines" reliability standard. It is equivalent to having a dial-tone available for all but about five minutes each year.
However, POTS depends upon a hardwired connection from each household to the phone company. Many new housing developments are being offered which do not have such a connection so these homes depend upon a VOIP non-hardwired linkage to the phone company. Thus they are dependent upon home internet service which can fail for several reasons.
VoIP generally depends on power provided at the customer site, compared to POTS providers powering simple telephones directly through the lines. For this reason, VoIP systems often have local battery backup to allow them to continue working through local power failures.