Amanagement information base(MIB) is a database used for managing the entities in acommunication network. Most often associated with theSimple Network Management Protocol(SNMP), the term is also used more generically in contexts such as inOSI/ISONetwork management model. While intended to refer to the complete collection of management information available on an entity, it is often used to refer to a particular subset, more correctly referred to as MIB-module.
Objects in the MIB are defined using a subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) called  "Structure of Management Information Version 2 (SMIv2)"RFC2578. The software that performs the parsing is a MIB compiler.
The database is hierarchical (tree-structured) and each entry is addressed through anobject identifier(OID).InternetdocumentationRFCsdiscuss MIBs, notablyRFC1155, "Structure and Identification of Management Information forTCP/IPbased internets", and its two companions,RFC1213, "Management Information Base for Network Management of TCP/IP-based internets", andRFC1157, "A Simple Network Management Protocol".
Abstract Syntax Notation One(ASN.1) is a standard and flexible notation that describesdata structuresfor representing, encoding, transmitting, and decoding data. It provides a set of formal rules for describing the structure of objects that are independent of machine-specific encoding techniques and is a precise, formal notation that removes ambiguities.
ASN.1 is a joint ISO andITU-Tstandard, originally defined in 1984 as part of CCITT X.409:1984. ASN.1 moved to its own standard, X.208, in 1988 due to its broader applicability. The substantially revised 1995 version is covered by the X.680 standards series.
An adapted subset of ASN.1,Structure of Management Information(SMI), is specified for use in SNMP to define sets of related MIB objects; these sets are termed MIB modules.
The MIB hierarchy can be depicted as a tree with a nameless root, the levels of which are assigned by different organizations. The top-level MIB OIDs belong to different standards organizations, while lower-level object IDs are allocated by associated organizations. This model permits management across alllayersof theOSI reference model, extending intoapplicationssuch asdatabases,email, and theJava reference model, as MIBs can be defined for all such area-specific information and operations.
A managed object (sometimes called a MIB object or object) is one of any number of specific characteristics of a managed device. Managed objects are made up of one or more object instances, which are essentially variables. An OID uniquely identifies a managed object in the MIB hierarchy.
Two types of managed objects exist:
An example of a managed object isatInput, which is a scalar object that contains a single object instance, theintegervalue that indicates the total number of inputAppleTalkpackets on a routerinterface.
The first version of theStructure of Management Information(SMIv1) specifies the use of a number of SMI-specific data types, which are divided into two categories: simple data types and application-wide data types.
Three simple data types are defined in the SNMPv1 SMI:
The following application-wide data types exist in the SNMPv1 SMI:
The SNMPv1 SMI defines highly structured tables that are used to group the instances of a tabular object (that is, an object that contains multiple variables). Tables are composed of zero or more rows, which are indexed in a way that allows an SNMP manager to retrieve or alter an entire row with a singleGet,GetNext, orSetcommand.
The second version of the SMI (SMIv2) is described inRFC2578andRFC2579. It enhances and adds to the SMIv1-specific data types, such as including bit strings, network addresses, and counters. Bit strings are defined only in SMIv2 and comprise zero or more named bits that specify a value. Network addresses represent an address from a particular protocol family.  Counters are non-negative integers that increase until they reach a maximum value and then return to zero. In SMIv1, a 32-bit counter size is specified. In SMIv2, 32-bit and 64-bit counters are defined.
SMIv2 also specifies information modules, which specify a group of related definitions. Three types of SMI information modules exist: MIB modules, compliance statements, and capability statements.
MIB modules are occasionally updated to add new functionality, remove ambiguities and fix defects. These changes are made in conformance to section 10 ofRFC2578and section 5 ofRFC2579. An example of a MIB module that has been updated many times is the important set of objects that was originally defined inRFC1213, also known as "MIB-II". This MIB module has since been split up and can be found in MIB modules such asRFC4293"Management Information Base for the Internet Protocol (IP)",RFC4022"Management Information Base for theTransmission Control Protocol(TCP)",RFC4113"Management Information Base for the User Datagram Protocol (UDP)",RFC2863"The Interfaces Group MIB" andRFC3418"Management Information Base (MIB) for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)".
Example of MIB for SNMPRFC3418
To call the value of sysName one would use:
There are a large number of MIBs defined by standards organizations like theIETF, private enterprises and other entities.
There are 318 RFCs in the first 5000 RFCs from the IETF that contain MIBs.  This list is a mere fraction of the MIBs that have been written:
The IETF andIEEEhave agreed to move MIBs relating to IEEE work (for example Ethernet and bridging) to their respective IEEE workgroup.  This is in process and a few items are complete.