Network via one of:
Anetwork interface controller(NIC, also known as anetwork interface card,network adapter,LAN adapterandphysical network interface) is acomputer hardwarecomponent that connects acomputerto acomputer network.
Early network interface controllers were commonly implemented onexpansion cardsthat plugged into acomputer bus. The low cost and ubiquity of theEthernetstandard means that most newer computers have a network interface built into themotherboard, or is contained into aUSB-connecteddongle.
Modern network interface controllers offer advanced features such asinterruptandDMAinterfaces to the host processors, support for multiple receive and transmit queues, partitioning into multiple logical interfaces, and on-controller network traffic processing such as theTCP offload engine.
The network controller implements the electronic circuitry required to communicate using a specificphysical layeranddata link layerstandard such asEthernetorWi-Fi.This provides a base for a full networkprotocol stack, allowing communication among computers on the samelocal area network(LAN) and large-scale network communications through routable protocols, such asInternet Protocol(IP).
The NIC allows computers to communicate over a computer network, either by using cables or wirelessly. The NIC is both a physical layer and data link layer device, as it provides physical access to a networking medium and, forIEEE 802and similar networks, provides a low-level addressing system through the use ofMAC addressesthat are uniquely assigned to network interfaces.
Network controllers were originally implemented as expansion cards that plugged into a computer bus. The low cost and ubiquity of the Ethernet standard means that most new computers have a network interface controller built into the motherboard. Newerservermotherboards may have multiple network interfaces built-in. The Ethernet capabilities are eitherintegratedinto the motherboardchipsetor implemented via a low-cost dedicated Ethernet chip. A separate network card is typically no longer required unless additional independent network connections are needed or some non-Ethernet type of network is used. A general trend in computer hardware is towardsintegrating the various components of systems on a chip, and this is also applied to network interface cards.
An Ethernet network controller typically has an8P8Csocket where the network cable is connected. Older NICs also suppliedBNC, orAUIconnections. Ethernet network controllers typically support 10Mbit/sEthernet,100 Mbit/s Ethernet, and1000 Mbit/sEthernetvarieties. Such controllers are designated as10/100/1000, meaning that they can support data rates of 10, 100 or1000 Mbit/s.10 Gigabit EthernetNICs are also available, and, as of November 2014, are beginning to be available oncomputer motherboards.
Modular designs likeSFP and SFP+are highly popular, especially forfiber-optic communication. These define a standard receptacle for media-dependent transceivers, so users can easily adapt the network interface to their needs.
LEDsadjacent to or integrated into the network connector inform the user of whether the network is connected, and when data activity occurs.
The NIC may includeROMto store its factory-assignedMAC address.
The NIC may use one or more of the following techniques to indicate the availability of packets to transfer:
NICs may use one or more of the following techniques to transfer packet data:
Multiqueue NICsprovide multiple transmit and receivequeues, allowing packets received by the NIC to be assigned to one of its receive queues. The NIC may distribute incoming traffic between the receive queues using ahash function. Each receive queue is assigned to a separateinterrupt; by routing each of those interrupts to differentCPUsorCPU cores, processing of the interrupt requests triggered by the network traffic received by a single NIC can be distributed improving performance.
The hardware-based distribution of the interrupts, described above, is referred to asreceive-side scaling(RSS).Purely software implementations also exist, such as thereceive packet steering(RPS),receive flow steering(RFS),andIntelFlow Director.Further performance improvements can be achieved by routing the interrupt requests to the CPUs or cores executing the applications that are the ultimate destinations fornetwork packetsthat generated the interrupts. This technique improveslocality of referenceand results in higher overall performance, reduced latency and better hardware utilization because of the higher utilization ofCPU cachesand fewer requiredcontext switches.
With multi-queue NICs, additional performance improvements can be achieved by distributing outgoing traffic among different transmit queues. By assigning different transmit queues to different CPUs or CPU cores, internal operating system contentions can be avoided. This approach is usually referred to astransmit packet steering(XPS).
Some products featureNIC partitioning(NPAR, also known asport partitioning) that usesSR-IOVvirtualization to divide a single 10 Gigabit Ethernet NIC into multiple discrete virtual NICs with dedicated bandwidth, which are presented to the firmware and operating system as separatePCI device functions.
Some NICs provide aTCP offload engineto offload processing of the entireTCP/IPstack to the network controller. It is primarily used with high-speed network interfaces, such as Gigabit Ethernet and 10 Gigabit Ethernet, for which the processing overhead of the network stack becomes significant.
Some NICs offer integratedfield-programmable gate arrays(FPGAs) for user-programmable processing of network traffic before it reaches the host computer, allowing for significantly reducedlatenciesin time-sensitive workloads.Moreover, some NICs offer complete low-latencyTCP/IP stacksrunning on integrated FPGAs in combination withuserspacelibraries that intercept networking operations usually performed by theoperating system kernel; Solarflare's open-sourceOpenOnloadnetwork stack that runs onLinuxis an example. This kind of functionality is usually referred to asuser-level networking.