Asynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM) is atelecommunicationsstandard defined by theAmerican National Standards InstituteandInternational Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector(ITU-T, formerly CCITT) for digital transmission of multiple types of traffic. ATM was developed to meet the needs of theBroadband Integrated Services Digital Networkas defined in the late 1980s,and designed to integrate telecommunication networks. It can handle both traditional high-throughput data traffic andreal-time,low-latencycontent such astelephony(voice) and video.ATM provides functionality that uses features ofcircuit switchingandpacket switchingnetworks by usingasynchronoustime-division multiplexing.ATM was seen in the 1990s as a competitor toEthernetand networks carrying IP traffic as, unlike Ethernet, it was faster and designed with quality-of-service in mind, but it fell out of favor once Ethernet reached speeds of 1 gigabits per second.
In theOpen Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference modeldata link layer(layer 2), the basic transfer units are calledframes. In ATM these frames are of a fixed length (53octets) calledcells. This differs from approaches such asInternet Protocol(IP) (OSI layer 3) orEthernet(also layer 2) that use variable-sized packets or frames. ATM uses aconnection-oriented modelin which avirtual circuitmust be established between two endpoints before the data exchange begins.These virtual circuits may be either permanent (dedicated connections that are usually preconfigured by the service provider), or switched (set up on a per-call basis usingsignalingand disconnected when the call is terminated).
The ATM network reference model approximately maps to the three lowest layers of the OSI model:physical layer, data link layer, andnetwork layer.ATM is a core protocol used in thesynchronous optical networking and synchronous digital hierarchy(SONET/SDH) backbone of thepublic switched telephone networkand in theIntegrated Services Digital Network(ISDN) but has largely been superseded in favor ofnext-generation networksbased on IP technology. Wireless and mobile ATM never established a significant foothold.
To minimizequeuing delayandpacket delay variation(PDV), all ATM cells are the same small size. Reduction of PDV is particularly important when carrying voice traffic, because the conversion of digitized voice into an analog audio signal is an inherentlyreal-timeprocess. Thedecoderneeds an evenly spaced stream of data items.
At the time of the design of ATM,155 Mbit/ssynchronous digital hierarchywith135 Mbit/spayload was considered a fast optical network link, and manyplesiochronous digital hierarchylinks in the digital network were considerably slower, ranging from 1.544 to45 Mbit/sin the US, and 2 to34 Mbit/sin Europe.
At155 Mbit/s, a typical full-length 1,500 byteEthernet framewould take 77.42μsto transmit. On a lower-speed1.544 Mbit/sT1 line, the same packet would take up to 7.8 milliseconds. A queuing delay induced by several such data packets might exceed the figure of 7.8 ms several times over. This was considered unacceptable for speech traffic.
The design of ATM aimed for a low-jitter network interface. Cells were introduced to provide short queuing delays while continuing to supportdatagramtraffic. ATM broke up all data packets and voice streams into 48-byte pieces, adding a 5-byte routing header to each one so that they could be reassembled later.  Being 1/30th the size reduced cell contention jitter by the same factor of 30.
The choice of 48 bytes was political rather than technical.When theCCITT(now ITU-T) was standardizing ATM, parties from the United States wanted a 64-byte payload because this was felt to be a good compromise between larger payloads optimized for data transmission and shorter payloads optimized for real-time applications like voice.  Parties from Europe wanted 32-byte payloads because the small size (4 ms of voice data) would avoid the need forecho cancellationon domestic voice calls.  The United States, due to its larger size, already had echo cancellers widely deployed.  Most of the European parties eventually came around to the arguments made by the Americans, but France and a few others held out for a shorter cell length.
48 bytes was chosen as a compromise, despite having all the disadvantages of both proposals and the additional inconvenience of not being apower of twoin size.5-byte headers were chosen because it was thought that 10% of the payload was the maximum price to pay for routing information.
An ATM cell consists of a 5-byte header and a 48-byte payload. ATM defines two different cell formats:user–network interface(UNI) andnetwork–network interface(NNI). Most ATM links use UNI cell format.
Diagram of a UNI ATM cell
Payload and padding if necessary (48 bytes)
Diagram of an NNI ATM cell
Payload and padding if necessary (48 bytes)
ATM uses the PT field to designate various special kinds of cells foroperations, administration and management(OAM) purposes, and to delineate packet boundaries in someATM adaptation layers(AAL). If themost significant bit(MSB) of the PT field is 0, this is a user data cell, and the other two bits are used to indicate network congestion and as a general-purpose header bit available for ATM adaptation layers. If the MSB is 1, this is a management cell, and the other two bits indicate the type: network management segment, network management end-to-end, resource management, and reserved for future use.
Several ATM link protocols use the HEC field to drive aCRC-based framingalgorithm, which allows locating the ATM cells with no overhead beyond what is otherwise needed for header protection. The 8-bit CRC is used to correct single-bit header errors and detect multi-bit header errors. When multi-bit header errors are detected, the current and subsequent cells are dropped until a cell with no header errors is found.
A UNI cell reserves the GFC field for a localflow controland sub-multiplexing system between users. This was intended to allow several terminals to share a single network connection in the same way that two ISDN phones can share a single basic rate ISDN connection. All four GFC bits must be zero by default.
The NNI cell format replicates the UNI format almost exactly, except that the 4-bit GFC field is re-allocated to the VPI field, extending the VPI to 12 bits. Thus, a single NNI ATM interconnection is capable of addressing almost 2VPs of up to almost 2VCs each.
ATM supports different types of services via AALs. Standardized AALs include AAL1, AAL2, and AAL5, and the rarely usedAAL3 and AAL4. AAL1 is used for constant bit rate (CBR) services and circuit emulation. Synchronization is also maintained at AAL1. AAL2 through AAL4 are used forvariable bitrate(VBR) services, and AAL5 for data. Which AAL is in use for a given cell is not encoded in the cell. Instead, it is negotiated by or configured at the endpoints on a per-virtual-connection basis.
Following the initial design of ATM, networks have become much faster. A 1500 byte (12000-bit) full-sizeEthernet frametakes only 1.2 μs to transmit on a10 Gbit/snetwork, reducing the motivation for small cells to reduce jitter due to contention. The increased link speeds by themselves do not eliminate jitter due to queuing.
ATM provides a useful ability to carry multiple logical circuits on a single physical or virtual medium, although other techniques exist, such asMulti-link PPP, EthernetVLANs,VxLAN,MPLS, and multi-protocol support overSONET.
An ATM network must establish a connection before two parties can send cells to each other. This is called avirtual circuit(VC). It can be a permanent virtual circuit (PVC), which is created administratively on the end points, or a switched virtual circuit (SVC), which is created as needed by the communicating parties. SVC creation is managed bysignaling, in which the requesting party indicates the address of the receiving party, the type of service requested, and whatever traffic parameters may be applicable to the selected service.Call admissionis then performed by the network to confirm that the requested resources are available and that a route exists for the connection.
ATM operates as a channel-based transport layer, using VCs. This is encompassed in the concept of the virtual paths (VP) and virtual channels. Every ATM cell has an 8- or 12-bit virtual path identifier (VPI) and 16-bit virtual channel identifier (VCI) pair defined in its header.The VCI, together with the VPI, is used to identify the next destination of a cell as it passes through a series of ATM switches on its way to its destination. The length of the VPI varies according to whether the cell is sent on a user-network interface (at the edge of the network), or if it is sent on a network-network interface (inside the network).
As these cells traverse an ATM network, switching takes place by changing the VPI/VCI values (label swapping). Although the VPI/VCI values are not necessarily consistent from one end of the connection to the other, the concept of a circuitisconsistent (unlike IP, where any given packet could get to its destination by a different route than the others).ATM switches use the VPI/VCI fields to identify the virtual channel link (VCL) of the next network that a cell needs to transit on its way to its final destination. The function of the VCI is similar to that of thedata link connection identifier(DLCI) inFrame Relayand the logical channel number and logical channel group number inX.25.
Another advantage of the use of virtual circuits comes with the ability to use them as a multiplexing layer, allowing different services (such as voice, Frame Relay, IP). The VPI is useful for reducing the switching table of some virtual circuits which have common paths.
ATM can build virtual circuits and virtual paths either statically or dynamically. Static circuits (permanent virtual circuits or PVCs) or paths (permanent virtual paths or PVPs) require that the circuit is composed of a series of segments, one for each pair of interfaces through which it passes.
PVPs and PVCs, though conceptually simple, require significant effort in large networks. They also do not support the re-routing of service in the event of a failure. Dynamically built PVPs (soft PVPs or SPVPs) and PVCs (soft PVCs or SPVCs), in contrast, are built by specifying the characteristics of the circuit (the servicecontract) and the two endpoints.
ATM networks create and remove switched virtual circuits (SVCs) on demand when requested by anend station. One application for SVCs is to carry individual telephone calls when a network of telephone switches are interconnected using ATM. SVCs were also used in attempts to replacelocal area networkswith ATM.
Most ATM networks supporting SPVPs, SPVCs, and SVCs use thePrivate Network-to-Network Interface(PNNI) protocol to share topology information between switches and select a route through a network. PNNI is alink-state routing protocollikeOSPFandIS-IS. PNNI also includes a very powerfulroute summarizationmechanism to allow construction of very large networks, as well as acall admission control(CAC) algorithm which determines the availability of sufficient bandwidth on a proposed route through a network in order to satisfy the service requirements of a VC or VP.
Another key ATM concept involves thetraffic contract. When an ATM circuit is set up each switch on the circuit is informed of the traffic class of the connection. ATM traffic contracts form part of the mechanism by whichquality of service(QoS) is ensured. There are four basic types (and several variants) which each have a set of parameters describing the connection.
VBR has real-time and non-real-time variants, and serves forburstytraffic. Non-real-time is sometimes abbreviated to vbr-nrt. Most traffic classes also introduce the concept of cell-delay variation tolerance (CDVT), which defines theclumpingof cells in time.
To maintain network performance, networks may applytraffic policingto virtual circuits to limit them to their traffic contracts at the entry points to the network, i.e. theuser–network interfaces(UNIs) andnetwork-to-network interfaces(NNIs) usingusage/network parameter control(UPC and NPC).The reference model given by the ITU-T and ATM Forum for UPC and NPC is thegeneric cell rate algorithm(GCRA),which is a version of theleaky bucket algorithm. CBR traffic will normally be policed to a PCR and CDVT alone, whereas VBR traffic will normally be policed using a dual leaky bucket controller to a PCR and CDVT and an SCR and maximum burst size (MBS). The MBS will normally be thepacket(SAR-SDU) size for the VBR VC in cells.
If the traffic on a virtual circuit exceeds its traffic contract, as determined by the GCRA, the network can either drop the cells or set the Cell Loss Priority (CLP) bit, allowing the cells to be dropped at a congestion point. Basic policing works on a cell-by-cell basis, but this is sub-optimal for encapsulated packet traffic as discarding a single cell will invalidate a packet's worth of cells. As a result, schemes such as partial packet discard (PPD) and early packet discard (EPD) have been developed to discard a whole packet's cells. This reduces the number of useless cells in the network, saving bandwidth for full packets. EPD and PPD work with AAL5 connections as they use the end of packet marker: the ATM user-to-ATM user (AUU) indication bit in the payload-type field of the header, which is set in the last cell of a SAR-SDU.
Traffic shapingusually takes place in thenetwork interface controller(NIC) in user equipment, and attempts to ensure that the cell flow on a VC will meet its traffic contract, i.e. cells will not be dropped or reduced in priority at the UNI. Since the reference model given for traffic policing in the network is the GCRA, this algorithm is normally used for shaping as well, and single and dualleaky bucketimplementations may be used as appropriate.
The ATM network reference model approximately maps to the three lowest layers of theOSI reference model. It specifies the following layers:
ATM became popular with telephone companies and many computer makers in the 1990s. However, even by the end of the decade, the betterprice–performance ratioofInternet Protocol-based products was competing with ATM technology for integrating real-time and bursty network traffic.Additionally, among cable companies using ATM there often would be discrete and competing management teams for telephony, video on demand, and broadcast and digital video reception, which adversely impacted efficiency.Companies such asFORE Systemsfocused on ATM products, while other large vendors such asCisco Systemsprovided ATM as an option.After the burst of thedot-com bubble, some still predicted that "ATM is going to dominate".However, in 2005 theATM Forum, which had been the trade organization promoting the technology, merged with groups promoting other technologies, and eventually became theBroadband Forum.
Wireless ATM,or mobile ATM, consists of an ATM core network with a wireless access network. ATM cells are transmitted from base stations to mobile terminals. Mobility functions are performed at an ATM switch in the core network, known as acrossover switch,which is similar to themobile switching centerof GSM networks.
The advantage of wireless ATM is its high bandwidth and high-speed handoffs done at layer 2. In the early 1990s,Bell LabsandNECresearch labs worked actively in this field.Andy Hopperfrom theUniversity of CambridgeComputer Laboratory also worked in this area.There was a wireless ATM forum formed to standardize the technology behind wireless ATM networks. The forum was supported by several telecommunication companies, including NEC,FujitsuandAT&T. Mobile ATM aimed to provide high-speed multimedia communications technology, capable of delivering broadband mobile communications beyond that of GSM and WLANs.