TheAddress Resolution Protocol(ARP) is acommunication protocolfor discovering thelink layeraddress, such as aMAC address, associated with ainternet layeraddress, typically anIPv4 address. The protocol, part of theInternet protocol suite, was defined in 1982 byRFC826, which isInternet StandardSTD 37.
ARP enables a host to send an IPv4 packet to another node in the local network by providing a protocol to get the MAC address associated with an IP address. The host broadcasts a request containing the node's IP address, and the node with that IP address replies with its MAC address.
ARP has been implemented with many combinations of network and data link layer technologies, such asIPv4,Chaosnet,DECnetand XeroxPARC Universal Packet(PUP) usingIEEE 802standards,FDDI,X.25,Frame RelayandAsynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM).
InInternet Protocol Version 6(IPv6) networks, the functionality of ARP is provided by theNeighbor Discovery Protocol(NDP).
The Address Resolution Protocol is arequest-responseprotocol. Its messages are directly encapsulated by a link layer protocol. It is communicated within the boundaries of a singlesubnetworkand is neverrouted.
The Address Resolution Protocol uses a simple message format containing one address resolution request or response. The packets are carried at thedata link layerof the underlying network as raw payload. In the case of Ethernet, a0x0806EtherTypevalue is used to identify ARP frames.
The size of the ARP message depends on the link layer and network layer address sizes. The messageheaderspecifies the types of network in use at each layer as well as the size of addresses of each. The message header is completed with the operation code for request (1) and reply (2). The payload of the packet consists of four addresses, the hardware and protocol address of the sender and receiver hosts.
The principal packet structure of ARP packets is shown in the following table which illustrates the case of IPv4 networks running on Ethernet. In this scenario, the packet has 48-bit fields for the sender hardware address (SHA) and target hardware address (THA), and 32-bit fields for the corresponding sender and target protocol addresses (SPA and TPA). The ARP packet size in this case is 28 bytes.
ARP parameter values have been standardized and are maintained by theInternet Assigned Numbers Authority(IANA).
TheEtherTypefor ARP is0x0806. This appears in the Ethernet frame header when the payload is an ARP packet and is not to be confused with PTYPE, which appears within this encapsulated ARP packet.
ARP's placement within theInternet protocol suiteand theOSI modelmay be a matter of confusion or even of dispute.RFC826places it into theLink Layerand characterizes it as a tool to inquire about the "higher level layer", such as the Internet layer.RFC1122also discusses ARP in its link layer section.Richard Stevens places ARP in OSI's data link layerwhile newer editions associate it with the network layer or introduce an intermediate OSI layer 2.5.
Two computers,AandB, are connected to the samelocal area networkwith no interveninggatewayorrouter.Ahas a packet to send to IP address192.168.0.55which happens to be the address ofB.
Before sending the packet toB,Abroadcasts an ARP request message – addressed with the broadcast MAC addressFF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FFand requesting response from the node with IP address192.168.0.55. All nodes of the network receive the message, but onlyBreplies since it has the requested IP address.Bresponds with an ARP response message containing its MAC addresses whichAreceives.Asends the data packet on the link addressed withB's MAC address.
Typically, network nodes maintain alookupcache that associates IP and MAC addressees. In this example, ifAhad the lookup cached, then it would not need to broadcast the ARP request. Also, whenBreceived the request, it could cache the lookup toAso that ifBneeds to send a packet toAlater, it does not need to use ARP to lookup its MAC address. Finally, whenAreceives the ARP response, it can cache the lookup for future messages addressed to the same IP address.
AnARP probein IPv4 is an ARP request constructed with the SHA of the probing host, an SPA of all 0s, a THA of all 0s, and a TPA set to the IPv4 address being probed for.  If some host on the network regards the IPv4 address (in the TPA) as its own, it will reply to the probe (via the SHA of the probing host) thus informing the probing host of the address conflict.  If instead there is no host which regards the IPv4 address as its own, then there will be no reply.  When several such probes have been sent, with slight delays, and none receive replies, it can reasonably be expected that no conflict exists.  As the original probe packet contains neither a valid SHA/SPA nor a valid THA/TPA pair, there is no risk of any host using the packet to update its cache with problematic data.  Before beginning to use an IPv4 address (whether received from manual configuration, DHCP, or some other means), a host implementing this specification must test to see if the address is already in use, by broadcasting ARP probe packets.
ARP may also be used as a simple announcement protocol. This is useful for updating other hosts' mappings of a hardware address when the sender's IP address or MAC address changes. Such an announcement, also called agratuitous ARP(GARP) message, is usually broadcast as anARP requestcontaining the SPA in the target field (TPA=SPA), with THA set to zero. An alternative way is to broadcast anARP replywith the sender's SHA and SPA duplicated in the target fields (TPA=SPA, THA=SHA).
TheARP requestandARP replyannouncements are both standards-based methods,but theARP requestmethod is preferred.Some devices may be configured for the use of either of these two types of announcements.
An ARP announcement is not intended to solicit a reply; instead, it updates any cached entries in the ARP tables of other hosts that receive the packet. The operation code in the announcement may be either request or reply; the ARP standard specifies that the opcode is only processed after the ARP table has been updated from the address fields.
Many operating systems issue an ARP announcement during startup. This helps to resolve problems that would otherwise occur if, for example, anetwork cardwas recently changed (changing the IP-address-to-MAC-address mapping) and other hosts still have the old mapping in their ARP caches.
ARP announcements are also used by some network interfaces to provide load balancing for incoming traffic. In ateamof network cards, it is used to announce a different MAC address within the team that should receive incoming packets.
ARP announcements can be used in theZeroconfprotocol to allow automatic assignment of alink-local addressto an interface where no other IP address configuration is available. The announcements are used to ensure an address chosen by a host is not in use by other hosts on the network link.
This function can be dangerous from a cybersecurity viewpoint since an attacker can obtain information about the other hosts of its subnet to save in their ARP cache (ARP spoofing) an entry where the attacker MAC is associated, for instance, to the IP of thedefault gateway, thus allowing them tointerceptall the traffic to external networks.
ARP mediationrefers to the process of resolving Layer-2 addresses through avirtual private wire service(VPWS) when different resolution protocols are used on the connected circuits, e.g.,Etherneton one end andFrame Relayon the other.  InIPv4, eachprovider edge(PE) device discovers the IP address of the locally attachedcustomer edge(CE) device and distributes that IP address to the corresponding remote PE device.  Then each PE device responds to local ARP requests using the IP address of the remote CE device and the hardware address of the local PE device.  InIPv6, each PE device discovers the IP address of both local and remote CE devices and then intercepts localNeighbor Discovery(ND) andInverse Neighbor Discovery(IND) packets and forwards them to the remote PE device.
Inverse Address Resolution Protocol(Inverse ARPorInARP) is used to obtainnetwork layeraddresses (for example,IP addresses) of other nodes fromdata link layer(Layer 2) addresses. Since ARP translates layer-3 addresses to layer-2 addresses, InARP may be described as its inverse. In addition, InARP is implemented as a protocol extension to ARP: it uses the same packet format as ARP, but different operation codes.
InARP is primarily used inFrame Relay(DLCI) and ATM networks, in which layer-2 addresses ofvirtual circuitsare sometimes obtained from layer-2 signaling, and the corresponding layer-3 addresses must be available before those virtual circuits can be used.
TheReverse Address Resolution Protocol(Reverse ARP or RARP), like InARP, translates layer-2 addresses to layer-3 addresses. However, in InARP the requesting station queries the layer-3 address of another node, whereas RARP is used to obtain the layer-3 address of the requesting station itself for address configuration purposes. RARP is obsolete; it was replaced byBOOTP, which was later superseded by theDynamic Host Configuration Protocol(DHCP).
Because ARP does not provide methods for authenticating ARP replies on a network, ARP replies can come from systems other than the one with the required Layer 2 address.  An ARPproxyis a system that answers the ARP request on behalf of another system for which it will forward traffic, normally as a part of the network's design, such as for a dialup internet service. By contrast, in ARPspoofingthe answering system, orspoofer, replies to a request for another system's address with the aim of intercepting data bound for that system. A malicious user may use ARP spoofing to perform aman-in-the-middleordenial-of-serviceattack on other users on the network. Various software exists to both detect and perform ARP spoofing attacks, though ARP itself does not provide any methods of protection from such attacks.
IPv6 uses theNeighbor Discovery Protocoland its extensions such asSecure Neighbor Discovery, rather than ARP.
Computers can maintain lists of known addresses, rather than using an active protocol. In this model, each computer maintains a database of the mapping ofLayer 3addresses (e.g.,IP addresses) toLayer 2addresses (e.g.,EthernetMAC addresses). This data is maintained primarily by interpreting ARP packets from the local network link. Thus, it is often called theARP cache. Since at least the 1980s,networked computers have a utility calledarpfor interrogating or manipulating this database.
Historically, other methods were used to maintain the mapping between addresses, such as static configuration files,or centrally maintained lists.
Embedded systems such as networked camerasand networked power distribution devices,which lack a user interface, can use so-calledARP stuffingto make an initial network connection, although this is a misnomer, as ARP is not involved.
ARP stuffing is accomplished as follows:
Such devices typically have a method to disable this process once the device is operating normally, as the capability can make it vulnerable to attack.