Auniform resource locator(URL), colloquially known as anaddresson theWeb,is a reference to aresourcethat specifies its location on acomputer networkand a mechanism for retrieving it. A URL is a specific type ofUniform Resource Identifier(URI),although many people use the two terms interchangeably.URLs occur most commonly to referenceweb pages(HTTP/HTTPS) but are also used for file transfer (FTP), email (mailto), database access (JDBC), and many other applications.
Mostweb browsersdisplay the URL of a web page above the page in anaddress bar. A typical URL could have the formhttp://www.example.com/index.html, which indicates a protocol (http), ahostname(www.example.com), and a file name (index.html).
Uniform Resource Locators were defined inRFC1738in 1994 byTim Berners-Lee, the inventor of theWorld Wide Web, and the URI working group of theInternet Engineering Task Force(IETF),as an outcome of collaboration started at the IETF Living Documentsbirds of a feathersession in 1992.
The format combines the pre-existing system ofdomain names(created in 1985) withfile pathsyntax, whereslashesare used to separatedirectoryandfilenames. Conventions already existed where server names could be prefixed to complete file paths, preceded by a double slash (//).
Berners-Lee later expressed regret at the use of dots to separate the parts of thedomain namewithinURIs, wishing he had used slashes throughout,and also said that, given the colon following the first component of a URI, the two slashes before the domain name were unnecessary.
EarlyWorldWideWebcollaborators including Berners-Lee originally proposed the use of UDIs: Universal Document Identifiers.
An early (1993) draft of the HTML Specificationreferred to "Universal" Resource Locators. This was dropped some time between June 1994 (RFC1630) and October 1994 (draft-ietf-uri-url-08.txt).In his bookWeaving the Web, Berners-Lee emphasizes his preference for the original inclusion of "universal" in the expansion rather than the word "uniform", to which it was later changed, and he gives a brief account of the contention that led to the change.
Every HTTP URL conforms to the syntax of a generic URI. The URI generic syntax consists of fivecomponentsorganized hierarchically in order of decreasing significance from left to right:
A component isundefinedif it has an associated delimiter and the delimiter does not appear in the URI; the scheme and path components are always defined.A component isemptyif it has no characters; the scheme component is always non-empty.
The authority component consists ofsubcomponents:
This is represented in asyntax diagramas:
The URI comprises:
A web browser will usuallydereferencea URL by performing anHTTPrequest to the specified host, by default on port number 80. URLs using thehttpsscheme require that requests and responses be made over asecure connection to the website.
Internet users are distributed throughout the world using a wide variety of languages and alphabets, and expect to be able to create URLs in their own local alphabets. AnInternationalized Resource Identifier(IRI) is a form of URL that includesUnicodecharacters.  All modern browsers support IRIs. The parts of the URL requiring special treatment for different alphabets are the domain name and path.
The domain name in the IRI is known as anInternationalized Domain Name(IDN). Web and Internet software automatically convert the domain name intopunycodeusable by theDomain Name System; for example, the Chinese URLhttp://例子.卷筒纸becomeshttp://xn--fsqu00a.xn--3lr804guic/. Thexn--indicates that the character was not originallyASCII.
The URL path name can also be specified by the user in the local writing system. If not already encoded, it is converted toUTF-8, and any characters not part of the basic URL character set are escaped ashexadecimalusingpercent-encoding; for example, the Japanese URLhttp://example.com/引き割り.htmlbecomeshttp://example.com/%E5%BC%95%E3%81%8D%E5%89%B2%E3%82%8A.html. The target computer decodes the address and displays the page.
Protocol-relative links (PRL), also known as protocol-relative URLs (PRURL), are URLs that have no protocol specified. For example,//example.comwill use the protocol of the current page, typically HTTP or HTTPS.