InIEEE 802 LAN/MAN standards, themedium access control(MAC), also calledmedia access control, is the layer that controls the hardware responsible for interaction with thewired(electrical or optical) or wirelesstransmission medium. The MAC sublayer and thelogical link control(LLC) sublayer together make up thedata link layer. The LLC providesflow controlandmultiplexingfor the logical link (i.e.EtherType,802.1Q VLAN tagetc), while the MAC provides flow control and multiplexing for the transmission medium.
These two sublayers together correspond to layer 2 of theOSI model. For compatibility reasons, LLC is optional for implementations ofIEEE 802.3(the frames are then "raw"), but compulsory for implementations of other IEEE 802 physical layer standards. Within the hierarchy of the OSI model and IEEE 802 standards, the MAC sublayer provides acontrol abstractionof the physical layer such that the complexities of physical link control are invisible to the LLC and upper layers of the network stack. Thus any LLC sublayer (and higher layers) may be used with any MAC. In turn, the medium access control block is formally connected to thePHYvia amedia-independent interface. Although the MAC block is today typically integrated with the PHY withinthe same device package, historically any MAC could be used with any PHY, independent of the transmission medium.
When sending data to another device on the network, the MAC sublayer encapsulates higher-level frames into frames appropriate for the transmission medium (i.e. the MAC adds asyncwordpreamble and also padding if necessary), adds aframe check sequenceto identify transmission errors, and then forwards the data to the physical layer as soon as the appropriatechannel access methodpermits it. For topologies with acollision domain(bus, ring, mesh, point-to-multipoint topologies), controlling when data is sent and when to wait is necessary to avoidcollisions. Additionally, the MAC is also responsible for compensating for collisions by initiating retransmission if ajam signalis detected. When receiving data from the physical layer, the MAC block ensures data integrity by verifying the sender's frame check sequences, and strips off the sender's preamble and padding before passing the data up to the higher layers.
According to IEEE Std 802-2001 section 6.2.3 "MAC sublayer", the primary functions performed by the MAC layer are:
In the case ofEthernet, the functions required of a MAC are:
The local network addresses used inIEEE 802networks andFDDInetworks are calledMAC addresses; they are based on the addressing scheme that was used in earlyEthernetimplementations. A MAC address is intended as a unique serial number. MAC addresses are typically assigned to network interface hardware at the time of manufacture. The most significant part of the address identifies the manufacturer, who assigns the remainder of the address, thus providing a potentially unique address. This makes it possible for frames to be delivered on a network link that interconnects hosts by some combination ofrepeaters,hubs,bridgesandswitches, but not bynetwork layerrouters. Thus, for example, when anIPpacket reaches its destination (sub)network, the destination IP address (a layer 3 or network layer concept) is resolved with theAddress Resolution ProtocolforIPv4, or byNeighbor Discovery Protocol(IPv6) into the MAC address (a layer 2 concept) of the destination host.
Examples of physical networks areEthernetnetworks andWi-Finetworks, both of which are IEEE 802 networks and use IEEE 802 48-bit MAC addresses.
A MAC layer is not required infull-duplexpoint-to-pointcommunication, but address fields are included in some point-to-point protocols for compatibility reasons.
The channel access control mechanisms provided by the MAC layer are also known as amultiple access method. This makes it possible for several stations connected to the samephysical mediumto share it. Examples of shared physical media arebus networks,ring networks, hub networks,wireless networksandhalf-duplexpoint-to-point links. The multiple access method may detect or avoid data packetcollisionsif a packet modecontentionbasedchannel access methodis used, or reserve resources to establish a logical channel if acircuit-switchedor channelization-based channel access method is used. The channel access control mechanism relies on a physical layermultiplexscheme.
The most widespread multiple access method is the contention-basedCSMA/CDused in Ethernet networks. This mechanism is only utilized within a network collision domain, for example, an Ethernet bus network or a hub-based star topology network. An Ethernet network may be divided into several collision domains, interconnected by bridges and switches.
A multiple access method is not required in a switchedfull-duplexnetwork, such as today's switched Ethernet networks, but is often available in the equipment for compatibility reasons.
Use of directional antennas andmillimeter-wavecommunication in awireless personal area networkincreases the probability of concurrent scheduling of non‐interfering transmissions in a localized area, which results in an immense increase in network throughput. However, the optimum scheduling of concurrent transmission is anNP-hard problem.
Cellular networks, such asGSM,UMTSorLTEnetworks, also use a MAC layer. The MAC protocol in cellular networks is designed to maximize the utilization of the expensive licensed spectrum.Theair interfaceof a cellular network is at layers 1 and 2 of the OSI model; at layer 2, it is divided into multiple protocol layers. In UMTS and LTE, those protocols are thePacket Data Convergence Protocol(PDCP), theRadio Link Control(RLC) protocol, and the MAC protocol. The base station has absolute control over the air interface and schedules the downlink access as well as the uplink access of all devices. The MAC protocol is specified by3GPPin TS 25.321for UMTS, TS 36.321for LTE and TS 38.321for5G.