TheData Encryption Standard(DES/ˌdiːˌiːˈɛs,dɛz/) is asymmetric-key algorithmfor theencryptionof digital data. Although its short key length of 56 bits makes it too insecure for modern applications, it has been highly influential in the advancement ofcryptography.
Developed in the early 1970s atIBMand based on an earlier design byHorst Feistel, the algorithm was submitted to theNational Bureau of Standards(NBS) following the agency's invitation to propose a candidate for the protection of sensitive, unclassified electronic government data. In 1976, after consultation with theNational Security Agency(NSA), the NBS selected a slightly modified version (strengthened againstdifferential cryptanalysis, but weakened againstbrute-force attacks), which was published as an officialFederal Information Processing Standard(FIPS) for the United States in 1977.
The publication of an NSA-approved encryption standard led to its quick international adoption and widespread academic scrutiny. Controversies arose fromclassifieddesign elements, a relatively shortkey lengthof thesymmetric-keyblock cipherdesign, and the involvement of the NSA, raising suspicions about abackdoor.  TheS-boxesthat had prompted those suspicions were designed by the NSA to address a vulnerability they secretly knew (differential cryptanalysis). However, the NSA also ensured that the key size was drastically reduced so that they could break the cipher by brute force attack.The intense academic scrutiny the algorithm received over time led to the modern understanding of block ciphers and theircryptanalysis.
DES is insecure due to the relatively short56-bit key size. In January 1999,distributed.netand theElectronic Frontier Foundationcollaborated to publicly break a DES key in 22 hours and 15 minutes (see§ Chronology). There are also some analytical results which demonstrate theoretical weaknesses in the cipher, although they are infeasible in practice. The algorithm is believed to be practically secure in the form ofTriple DES, although there are theoretical attacks. This cipher has been superseded by theAdvanced Encryption Standard(AES). DES has been withdrawn as a standard by theNational Institute of Standards and Technology.
Some documents distinguish between the DES standard and its algorithm, referring to the algorithm as theDEA(Data Encryption Algorithm).
The origins of DES date to 1972, when aNational Bureau of Standardsstudy of US governmentcomputer securityidentified a need for a government-wide standard for encrypting unclassified, sensitive information.
Around the same time, engineerMohamed Atallain 1972 foundedAtalla Corporationand developed the firsthardware security module(HSM), the so-called "Atalla Box" which was commercialized in 1973. It protected offline devices with a securePINgenerating key, and was a commercial success. Banks and credit card companies were fearful that Atalla would dominate the market, which spurred the development of an international encryption standard.Atalla was an early competitor toIBMin the banking market, and was cited as an influence by IBM employees who worked on the DES standard.TheIBM 3624later adopted a similar PIN verification system to the earlier Atalla system.
On 15 May 1973, after consulting with the NSA, NBS solicited proposals for a cipher that would meet rigorous design criteria. None of the submissions was suitable. A second request was issued on 27 August 1974. This time,IBMsubmitted a candidate which was deemed acceptable—a cipher developed during the period 1973–1974 based on an earlier algorithm,Horst Feistel'sLucifercipher. The team at IBM involved in cipher design and analysis included Feistel,Walter Tuchman,Don Coppersmith, Alan Konheim, Carl Meyer, Mike Matyas,Roy Adler,Edna Grossman, Bill Notz, Lynn Smith, andBryant Tuckerman.
On 17 March 1975, the proposed DES was published in theFederal Register. Public comments were requested, and in the following year two open workshops were held to discuss the proposed standard. There was criticism received frompublic-key cryptographypioneersMartin HellmanandWhitfield Diffie,citing a shortenedkey lengthand the mysterious "S-boxes" as evidence of improper interference from the NSA. The suspicion was that the algorithm had been covertly weakened by the intelligence agency so that they—but no one else—could easily read encrypted messages.Alan Konheim (one of the designers of DES) commented, "We sent the S-boxes off to Washington. They came back and were all different."TheUnited States Senate Select Committee on Intelligencereviewed the NSA's actions to determine whether there had been any improper involvement. In the unclassified summary of their findings, published in 1978, the Committee wrote:
In the development of DES, NSA convincedIBMthat a reduced key size was sufficient; indirectly assisted in the development of the S-box structures; and certified that the final DES algorithm was, to the best of their knowledge, free from any statistical or mathematical weakness.
However, it also found that
NSA did not tamper with the design of the algorithm in any way. IBM invented and designed the algorithm, made all pertinent decisions regarding it, and concurred that the agreed upon key size was more than adequate for all commercial applications for which the DES was intended.
Another member of the DES team, Walter Tuchman, stated "We developed the DES algorithm entirely within IBM using IBMers. The NSA did not dictate a single wire!"In contrast, a declassified NSA book on cryptologic history states:
In 1973 NBS solicited private industry for a data encryption standard (DES). The first offerings were disappointing, so NSA began working on its own algorithm. Then Howard Rosenblum, deputy director for research and engineering, discovered that Walter Tuchman of IBM was working on a modification to Lucifer for general use. NSA gave Tuchman a clearance and brought him in to work jointly with the Agency on his Lucifer modification."
and
NSA worked closely with IBM to strengthen the algorithm against all except brute-force attacks and to strengthen substitution tables, called S-boxes. Conversely, NSA tried to convince IBM to reduce the length of the key from 64 to 48 bits. Ultimately they compromised on a 56-bit key.
Some of the suspicions about hidden weaknesses in the S-boxes were allayed in 1990, with the independent discovery and open publication byEli BihamandAdi Shamirofdifferential cryptanalysis, a general method for breaking block ciphers. The S-boxes of DES were much more resistant to the attack than if they had been chosen at random, strongly suggesting that IBM knew about the technique in the 1970s. This was indeed the case; in 1994, Don Coppersmith published some of the original design criteria for the S-boxes.According toSteven Levy, IBM Watson researchers discovered differential cryptanalytic attacks in 1974 and were asked by the NSA to keep the technique secret.Coppersmith explains IBM's secrecy decision by saying, "that was because [differential cryptanalysis] can be a very powerful tool, used against many schemes, and there was concern that such information in the public domain could adversely affect national security." Levy quotes Walter Tuchman: "[t]hey asked us to stamp all our documents confidential... We actually put a number on each one and locked them up in safes, because they were considered U.S. government classified. They said do it. So I did it".Bruce Schneier observed that "It took the academic community two decades to figure out that the NSA 'tweaks' actually improved the security of DES."
Despite the criticisms, DES was approved as a federal standard in November 1976, and published on 15 January 1977 asFIPSPUB 46, authorized for use on all unclassified data. It was subsequently reaffirmed as the standard in 1983, 1988 (revised as FIPS-46-1), 1993 (FIPS-46-2), and again in 1999 (FIPS-46-3), the latter prescribing "Triple DES" (see below). On 26 May 2002, DES was finally superseded by the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), followinga public competition. On 19 May 2005, FIPS 46-3 was officially withdrawn, butNISThas approvedTriple DESthrough the year 2030 for sensitive government information.
The algorithm is also specified inANSIX3.92 (Today X3 is known asINCITSand ANSI X3.92 as ANSIINCITS92),NIST SP 800-67and ISO/IEC 18033-3(as a component ofTDEA).
Another theoretical attack, linear cryptanalysis, was published in 1994, but it was theElectronic Frontier Foundation'sDES crackerin 1998 that demonstrated that DES could be attacked very practically, and highlighted the need for a replacement algorithm. These and other methods ofcryptanalysisare discussed in more detail later in this article.
The introduction of DES is considered to have been a catalyst for the academic study of cryptography, particularly of methods to crack block ciphers. According to a NIST retrospective about DES,
DES is the archetypalblock cipher—analgorithmthat takes a fixed-length string ofplaintextbits and transforms it through a series of complicated operations into anotherciphertextbitstring of the same length. In the case of DES, theblock sizeis 64 bits. DES also uses akeyto customize the transformation, so that decryption can supposedly only be performed by those who know the particular key used to encrypt. The key ostensibly consists of 64 bits; however, only 56 of these are actually used by the algorithm. Eight bits are used solely for checkingparity, and are thereafter discarded. Hence the effectivekey lengthis 56 bits.
The key is nominally stored or transmitted as 8bytes, each with odd parity. According to ANSI X3.92-1981 (Now, known as ANSIINCITS92–1981), section 3.5:
One bit in each 8-bit byte of theKEYmay be utilized for error detection in key generation, distribution, and storage. Bits 8, 16,..., 64 are for use in ensuring that each byte is of odd parity.
Like other block ciphers, DES by itself is not a secure means of encryption, but must instead be used in amode of operation. FIPS-81 specifies several modes for use with DES.Further comments on the usage of DES are contained in FIPS-74.
Decryption uses the same structure as encryption, but with the keys used in reverse order. (This has the advantage that the same hardware or software can be used in both directions.)
The algorithm's overall structure is shown in Figure 1: there are 16 identical stages of processing, termedrounds. There is also an initial and finalpermutation, termedIPandFP, which areinverses(IP "undoes" the action of FP, and vice versa). IP and FP have no cryptographic significance, but were included in order to facilitate loading blocks in and out of mid-1970s 8-bit based hardware.
Before the main rounds, the block is divided into two 32-bit halves and processed alternately; this criss-crossing is known as theFeistel scheme. The Feistel structure ensures that decryption and encryption are very similar processes—the only difference is that the subkeys are applied in the reverse order when decrypting. The rest of the algorithm is identical. This greatly simplifies implementation, particularly in hardware, as there is no need for separate encryption and decryption algorithms.
The ⊕ symbol denotes theexclusive-OR(XOR) operation. TheF-functionscrambles half a block together with some of the key. The output from the F-function is then combined with the other half of the block, and the halves are swapped before the next round. After the final round, the halves are swapped; this is a feature of the Feistel structure which makes encryption and decryption similar processes.
The F-function, depicted in Figure 2, operates on half a block (32 bits) at a time and consists of four stages:
The alternation of substitution from the S-boxes, and permutation of bits from the P-box and E-expansion provides so-called "confusion and diffusion" respectively, a concept identified byClaude Shannonin the 1940s as a necessary condition for a secure yet practical cipher.
Figure 3 illustrates thekey schedulefor encryption—the algorithm which generates the subkeys. Initially, 56 bits of the key are selected from the initial 64 byPermuted Choice 1(PC-1)—the remaining eight bits are either discarded or used asparitycheck bits. The 56 bits are then divided into two 28-bit halves; each half is thereafter treated separately. In successive rounds, both halves are rotated left by one or two bits (specified for each round), and then 48 subkey bits are selected byPermuted Choice 2(PC-2)—24 bits from the left half, and 24 from the right. The rotations (denoted by "<<<" in the diagram) mean that a different set of bits is used in each subkey; each bit is used in approximately 14 out of the 16 subkeys.
The key schedule for decryption is similar—the subkeys are in reverse order compared to encryption. Apart from that change, the process is the same as for encryption. The same 28 bits are passed to all rotation boxes.
Pseudocodefor the DES algorithm follows.
Although more information has been published on the cryptanalysis of DES than any other block cipher, the most practical attack to date is still a brute-force approach. Various minor cryptanalytic properties are known, and three theoretical attacks are possible which, while having a theoretical complexity less than a brute-force attack, require an unrealistic number ofknownorchosen plaintextsto carry out, and are not a concern in practice.
For anycipher, the most basic method of attack isbrute force—trying every possible key in turn. Thelength of the keydetermines the number of possible keys, and hence the feasibility of this approach. For DES, questions were raised about the adequacy of its key size early on, even before it was adopted as a standard, and it was the small key size, rather than theoretical cryptanalysis, which dictated a need for a replacementalgorithm. As a result of discussions involving external consultants including the NSA, the key size was reduced from 256 bits to 56 bits to fit on a single chip.
In academia, various proposals for a DES-cracking machine were advanced. In 1977, Diffie and Hellman proposed a machine costing an estimated US$20 million which could find a DES key in a single day.By 1993, Wiener had proposed a key-search machine costing US$1 million which would find a key within 7 hours. However, none of these early proposals were ever implemented—or, at least, no implementations were publicly acknowledged. The vulnerability of DES was practically demonstrated in the late 1990s.In 1997,RSA Securitysponsored a series of contests, offering a $10,000 prize to the first team that broke a message encrypted with DES for the contest. That contest was won by theDESCHALL Project, led by Rocke Verser,Matt Curtin, and Justin Dolske, using idle cycles of thousands of computers across the Internet. The feasibility of cracking DES quickly was demonstrated in 1998 when a custom DES-cracker was built by theElectronic Frontier Foundation(EFF), a cyberspace civil rights group, at the cost of approximately US$250,000 (seeEFF DES cracker). Their motivation was to show that DES was breakable in practice as well as in theory: "There are many people who will not believe a truth until they can see it with their own eyes. Showing them a physical machine that can crack DES in a few days is the only way to convince some people that they really cannot trust their security to DES." The machine brute-forced a key in a little more than 2 days' worth of searching.
The next confirmed DES cracker was the COPACOBANA machine built in 2006 by teams of theUniversities of BochumandKiel, both inGermany. Unlike the EFF machine, COPACOBANA consists of commercially available, reconfigurable integrated circuits. 120 of thesefield-programmable gate arrays(FPGAs) of type XILINX Spartan-3 1000 run in parallel. They are grouped in 20 DIMM modules, each containing 6 FPGAs. The use of reconfigurable hardware makes the machine applicable to other code breaking tasks as well.One of the more interesting aspects of COPACOBANA is its cost factor. One machine can be built for approximately $10,000.The cost decrease by roughly a factor of 25 over the EFF machine is an example of the continuous improvement ofdigital hardware—seeMoore's law. Adjusting for inflation over 8 years yields an even higher improvement of about 30x. Since 2007,SciEngines GmbH, a spin-off company of the two project partners of COPACOBANA has enhanced and developed successors of COPACOBANA. In 2008 their COPACOBANA RIVYERA reduced the time to break DES to less than one day, using 128 Spartan-3 5000's. SciEngines RIVYERA held the record in brute-force breaking DES, having utilized 128 Spartan-3 5000 FPGAs.Their 256 Spartan-6 LX150 model has further lowered this time.
In 2012, David Hulton andMoxie Marlinspikeannounced a system with 48 Xilinx Virtex-6 LX240T FPGAs, each FPGA containing 40 fully pipelined DES cores running at 400 MHz, for a total capacity of  768 gigakeys/sec. The system can exhaustively search the entire 56-bit DES key space in about 26 hours and this service is offered for a fee online.
There are three attacks known that can break the full 16 rounds of DES with less complexity than a brute-force search:differential cryptanalysis(DC),linear cryptanalysis(LC),andDavies' attack.However, the attacks are theoretical and are generally considered infeasible to mount in practice;these types of attack are sometimes termed certificational weaknesses.
There have also been attacks proposed against reduced-round versions of the cipher, that is, versions of DES with fewer than 16 rounds. Such analysis gives an insight into how many rounds are needed for safety, and how much of a "security margin" the full version retains.
Differential-linear cryptanalysiswas proposed by Langford and Hellman in 1994, and combines differential and linear cryptanalysis into a single attack.An enhanced version of the attack can break 9-round DES with 2chosen plaintexts and has a 2time complexity (Biham and others, 2002).
DES exhibits the complementation property, namely that
wherex¯{\displaystyle {\overline {x}}}is thebitwise complementofx.{\displaystyle x.}EK{\displaystyle E_{K}}denotes encryption with keyK.{\displaystyle K.}P{\displaystyle P}andC{\displaystyle C}denote plaintext and ciphertext blocks respectively. The complementation property means that the work for abrute-force attackcould be reduced by a factor of 2 (or a single bit) under achosen-plaintextassumption. By definition, this property also applies to TDES cipher.
DES also has four so-calledweak keys. Encryption (E) and decryption (D) under a weak key have the same effect (seeinvolution):
There are also six pairs ofsemi-weak keys. Encryption with one of the pair of semiweak keys,K1{\displaystyle K_{1}}, operates identically to decryption with the other,K2{\displaystyle K_{2}}:
It is easy enough to avoid the weak and semiweak keys in an implementation, either by testing for them explicitly, or simply by choosing keys randomly; the odds of picking a weak or semiweak key by chance are negligible. The keys are not really any weaker than any other keys anyway, as they do not give an attack any advantage.
DES has also been proved not to be agroup, or more precisely, the set{EK}{\displaystyle \{E_{K}\}}(for all possible keysK{\displaystyle K}) underfunctional compositionis not a group, nor "close" to being a group.This was an open question for some time, and if it had been the case, it would have been possible to break DES, and multiple encryption modes such asTriple DESwould not increase the security, because repeated encryption (and decryptions) under different keys would be equivalent to encryption under another, single key.
Simplified DES (SDES) was designed for educational purposes only, to help students learn about modern cryptanalytic techniques.
SDES has similar structure and properties to DES, but has been simplified to make it much easier to perform encryption and decryption by hand with pencil and paper.
Some people feel that learning SDES gives insight into DES and other block ciphers, and insight into various cryptanalytic attacks against them.
Concerns about security and the relatively slow operation of DES insoftwaremotivated researchers to propose a variety of alternativeblock cipherdesigns, which started to appear in the late 1980s and early 1990s: examples includeRC5,Blowfish,IDEA,NewDES,SAFER,CAST5andFEAL. Most of these designs kept the 64-bitblock sizeof DES, and could act as a "drop-in" replacement, although they typically used a 64-bit or 128-bit key. In theSoviet UniontheGOST 28147-89algorithm was introduced, with a 64-bit block size and a 256-bit key, which was also used inRussialater.
DES itself can be adapted and reused in a more secure scheme. Many former DES users now useTriple DES(TDES) which was described and analysed by one of DES's patentees (seeFIPSPub 46–3); it involves applying DES three times with two (2TDES) or three (3TDES) different keys. TDES is regarded as adequately secure, although it is quite slow. A less computationally expensive alternative isDES-X, which increases the key size by XORing extra key material before and after DES.GDESwas a DES variant proposed as a way to speed up encryption, but it was shown to be susceptible to differential cryptanalysis.
On January 2, 1997, NIST announced that they wished to choose a successor to DES.In 2001, after an international competition, NIST selected a new cipher, theAdvanced Encryption Standard(AES), as a replacement.The algorithm which was selected as the AES was submitted by its designers under the nameRijndael. Other finalists in the NISTAES competitionincludedRC6,Serpent,MARS, andTwofish.