Category 5 cable(Cat 5) is atwisted paircable forcomputer networks. Since 2001, the variant commonly in use is theCategory 5especification (Cat 5e). The cable standard provides performance of up to 100 MHz and is suitable for most varieties ofEthernet over twisted pairup to2.5GBASE-Tbut more commonly runs at1000BASE-T(Gigabit Ethernet) speeds. Cat 5 is also used to carry other signals such astelephoneandvideo.
This cable is commonly connected usingpunch-down blocksandmodular connectors. Most Category 5 cables areunshielded, relying on thebalanced linetwisted pair design anddifferential signalingfor noise suppression.
Category 5 is currently defined inISO/IEC 11801,IEC 61156andEN 50173, though it was originally defined inANSI/TIA/EIA-568-A(with clarification in TSB-95).These documents specify performance characteristics and test requirements forfrequenciesup to 100 MHz.
The cable is available in both stranded and solid conductor forms. The stranded form is more flexible and withstands more bending without breaking.Patch cablesare stranded. Permanent wiring used instructured cablingis solid. The category and type of cable can be identified by the printing on the jacket.
The Category 5 specification requires conductors to be pure copper. There has been a rise in counterfeit cables, especially of the copper-clad aluminum (CCA) variety.This has exposed the manufacturers and installers of such fake cable to legal liabilities.
The Category 5e specification improves upon the Category 5 specification by further mitigatingcrosstalk.Thebandwidth(100 MHz) and physical construction are the same between the two,and most Cat 5 cables actually happen to meet Cat 5e specifications even though they are not certified as such.Category 5 was deprecated in 2001 and superseded by the Category 5e specification.
TheCategory 6specification improves upon the Category 5e specification by extending frequency response and further reducing crosstalk. The improved performance of Cat 6 provides 250 MHz bandwidth.Category 6A cable provides 500 MHz bandwidth. Both variants arebackward compatiblewith Category 5 and 5e cables.
Cable types, connector types and cabling topologies are defined byANSI/TIA-568. Category 5 cable is nearly always terminated with8P8C modular connectors(often referred to incorrectly asRJ45connectors). The cable is terminated in either theT568Ascheme or theT568Bscheme. The two schemes work equally well and may be mixed in an installation so long as the same scheme is used on both ends of each cable.
Category 5 cable is used in structured cabling forcomputer networkssuch asEthernet over twisted pair. The cable standard prescribes performance parameters for frequencies up to100 MHzand is suitable for10BASE-T,100BASE-TX(Fast Ethernet),1000BASE-T(Gigabit Ethernet), and2.5GBASE-T.10BASE-Tand100BASE-TXEthernet connections require two wire pairs. 1000BASE-T and faster Ethernet connections require four wire pairs. Through the use ofpower over Ethernet(PoE),powercan be carried over the cable in addition to Ethernet data.
Cat 5 is also used to carry other signals such astelephonyandvideo.In some cases, multiple signals can be carried on a single cable; Cat 5 can carry two conventional telephone lines as well as 100BASE-TX in a single cable.TheUSOC/RJ-61wiring standard may be used in multi-line telephone connections. Various schemes exist for transporting both analog and digital video over the cable.HDBaseT(10.2 Gbit/s)is one such scheme.
The use ofbalanced lineshelps preserve a highsignal-to-noise ratiodespite interference from both external sources and crosstalk from other pairs.
Outer insulation is typicallypolyvinyl chloride(PVC)orlow smoke zero halogen(LS0H).
Most Category 5 cables can be bent at any radius exceeding approximately four times the outside diameter of the cable.
The maximum length for a cable segment is 100 meters (330 ft) per TIA/EIA 568-5-A.If longer runs are required, the use of active hardware such as a repeater or switch is necessary.The specifications for 10BASE-T networking specify a 100-meter length between active devices.This allows for 90 meters of solid-core permanent wiring, two connectors and two stranded patch cables of 5 meters, one at each end.
Since 1995, solid-conductorunshielded twisted pair(UTP) cables for backbone cabling is required to be no thicker than 22American Wire Gauge(AWG) and no thinner than 24 AWG, or 26 AWG for shorter-distance cabling. This standard has been retained with the 2009 revision of ANSI TIA/EIA 568.
Although cable assemblies containing four pairs are common, Category 5 is not limited to four pairs. Backbone applications involve using up to100 pairs.
The distance per twist is commonly referred to as pitch. Each of the four pairs in a Cat 5 cable has a differing pitch to minimizecrosstalkbetween the pairs. The pitch of the twisted pairs is not specified in the standard.
Some cables areUV-ratedorUV-stablemeaning they can be exposed to outdoorUVradiation without significant degradation.
Plenum-rated cables are slower to burn and produce less smoke than cables using a mantle of materials like PVC. Plenum-rated cables may be installed inplenum spaceswhere PVC is not allowed.
Shielded cables (FTP or STP) are useful for environments where proximity toRF equipmentmay introduceelectromagnetic interference, and can also be used whereeavesdroppinglikelihood should be minimized.